The Project Gutenberg EBook of NotreDame de Paris, by Victor HugoThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away orreuse it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.orgTitle: NotreDame de Paris    The Hunchback of Notre DameAuthor: Victor HugoTranslator: Isabel F. HapgoodRelease Date: April, 2001 [Etext #2610]Posting Date: November 13, 2009Last Updated: October 27, 2016Language: EnglishCharacter set encoding: UTF8 START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTREDAME DE PARIS Produced by Peter Snow CaoNOTREDAME DE PARISAlso known as:THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAMEBy Victor HugoTranslated by Isabel F. HapgoodPREFACE.A few years ago, while visiting or, rather, rummaging about NotreDame,the author of this book found, in an obscure nook of one of the towers,the following word, engraved by hand upon the wall:    _ANANKE_.These Greek capitals, black with age, and quite deeply graven inthe stone, with I know not what signs peculiar to Gothic caligraphyimprinted upon their forms and upon their attitudes, as though with thepurpose of revealing that it had been a hand of the Middle Ages whichhad inscribed them there, and especially the fatal and melancholymeaning contained in them, struck the author deeply.He questioned himself; he sought to divine who could have been that soulin torment which had not been willing to quit this world without leavingthis stigma of crime or unhappiness upon the brow of the ancient church.Afterwards, the wall was whitewashed or scraped down, I know not which,and the inscription disappeared. For it is thus that people have been inthe habit of proceeding with the marvellous churches of the Middle Agesfor the last two hundred years. Mutilations come to them from everyquarter, from within as well as from without. The priest whitewashesthem, the archdeacon scrapes them down; then the populace arrives anddemolishes them.Thus, with the exception of the fragile memory which the author of thisbook here consecrates to it, there remains today nothing whateverof the mysterious word engraved within the gloomy tower ofNotreDame,nothing of the destiny which it so sadly summed up. Theman who wrote that word upon the wall disappeared from the midst of thegenerations of man many centuries ago; the word, in its turn, has beeneffaced from the wall of the church; the church will, perhaps, itselfsoon disappear from the face of the earth.It is upon this word that this book is founded.March, 1831.TABLE OF CONTENTS.VOLUME I.   BOOK FIRST.   I.  The Grand Hall   II.  Pierre Gringoire   III. Monsieur the Cardinal   IV.  Master Jacques Coppenole   V.  Quasimodo   VI.  Esmeralda   BOOK SECOND.   I.  From Charybdis to Scylla   II.  The Place de Grève   III. Kisses for Blows   IV.  The Inconveniences of Following a Pretty Woman through       the Streets in the Evening   V.  Result of the Dangers   VI.  The Broken Jug   VII. A Bridal Night   BOOK THIRD.   I.  NotreDame   II.  A Birdeye View of Paris   BOOR FOURTH.   I.  Good Souls   II.  Claude Frollo   III. Immanis Pecoris Custos, Immanior Ipse   IV.  The Dog and his Master   V.  More about Claude Frollo   VI.  Unpopularity   BOOK FIFTH.   I.  Abbas Beati Martini   II.  This will Kill That   BOOK SIXTH.   I.  An Impartial Glance at the Ancient Magistracy   II.  The Rathole   III. History of a Leavened Cake of Maize   IV.  A Tear for a Drop of Water   V.  End of the Story of the CakeBOOK FIRST.CHAPTER I. THE GRAND HALL.Three hundred and fortyeight years, six months, and nineteen days agotoday, the Parisians awoke to the sound of all the bells in the triplecircuit of the city, the university, and the town ringing a full peal.The sixth of January, 1482, is not, however, a day of which history haspreserved the memory. There was nothing notable in the event whichthus set the bells and the bourgeois of Paris in a ferment from earlymorning. It was neither an assault by the Picards nor the Burgundians,nor a hunt led along in procession, nor a revolt of scholars in the townof Laas, nor an entry of our much dread lord, monsieur the king, noreven a pretty hanging of male and female thieves by the courts of Paris.Neither was it the arrival, so frequent in the fifteenth century, ofsome plumed and bedizened embassy. It was barely two days since the lastcavalcade of that nature, that of the Flemish ambassadors charged withconcluding the marriage between the dauphin and Marguerite of Flanders,had made its entry into Paris, to the great annoyance of M. le Cardinalde Bourbon, who, for the sake of pleasing the king, had been obligedto assume an amiable mien towards this whole rustic rabble of Flemishburgomasters, and to regale them at his Hôtel de Bourbon, with a verypretty morality, allegorical satire, and farce, while a driving raindrenched the magnificent tapestries at his door.What put the whole population of Paris in commotion, as Jehan deTroyes expresses it, on the sixth of January, was the double solemnity,united from time immemorial, of the Epiphany and the Feast of Fools.On that day, there was to be a bonfire on the Place de Grève, a maypoleat the Chapelle de Braque, and a mystery at the Palais de Justice. Ithad been cried, to the sound of the trumpet, the preceding evening atall the cross roads, by the provost men, clad in handsome, short,sleeveless coats of violet camelot, with large white crosses upon theirbreasts.So the crowd of citizens, male and female, having closed their housesand shops, thronged from every direction, at early morn, towards someone of the three spots designated.Each had made his choice; one, the bonfire; another, the maypole;another, the mystery play. It must be stated, in honor of the good senseof the loungers of Paris, that the greater part of this crowd directedtheir steps towards the bonfire, which was quite in season, or towardsthe mystery play, which was to be presented in the grand hall of thePalais de Justice (the courts of law), which was well roofed and walled;and that the curious left the poor, scantily flowered maypole to shiverall alone beneath the sky of January, in the cemetery of the Chapel ofBraque.The populace thronged the avenues of the law courts in particular,because they knew that the Flemish ambassadors, who had arrived two dayspreviously, intended to be present at the representation of the mystery,and at the election of the Pope of the Fools, which was also to takeplace in the grand hall.It was no easy matter on that day, to force one way into that grandhall, although it was then reputed to be the largest covered enclosurein the world (it is true that Sauval had not yet measured the grand hallof the Château of Montargis). The palace place, encumbered with people,offered to the curious gazers at the windows the aspect of a sea; intowhich five or six streets, like so many mouths of rivers, dischargedevery moment fresh floods of heads. The waves of this crowd, augmentedincessantly, dashed against the angles of the houses which projectedhere and there, like so many promontories, into the irregular basin ofthe place. In the centre of the lofty Gothic façade of the palace, thegrand staircase, incessantly ascended and descended by a double current,which, after parting on the intermediate landingplace, flowed in broadwaves along its lateral slopes,the grand staircase, I say, trickledincessantly into the place, like a cascade into a lake. The cries, thelaughter, the trampling of those thousands of feet, produced a greatnoise and a great clamor. From time to time, this noise and clamorredoubled; the current which drove the crowd towards the grand staircaseflowed backwards, became troubled, formed whirlpools. This was producedby the buffet of an archer, or the horse of one of the provostsergeants, which kicked to restore order; an admirable tradition whichthe provostship has bequeathed to the constablery, the constablery tothe _maréchaussée_, the _maréchaussée_ to our _gendarmeri_ of Paris.    The word Gothic, in the sense in which it is generally employed,is wholly unsuitable, but wholly consecrated. Hence we accept it andwe adopt it, like all the rest of the world, to characterize thearchitecture of the second half of the Middle Ages, where the ogive isthe principle which succeeds the architecture of the first period, ofwhich the semicircle is the father.Thousands of good, calm, bourgeois faces thronged the windows, thedoors, the dormer windows, the roofs, gazing at the palace, gazingat the populace, and asking nothing more; for many Parisians contentthemselves with the spectacle of the spectators, and a wall behind whichsomething is going on becomes at once, for us, a very curious thingindeed.If it could be granted to us, the men of 1830, to mingle in thoughtwith those Parisians of the fifteenth century, and to enter with them,jostled, elbowed, pulled about, into that immense hall of the palace,which was so cramped on that sixth of January, 1482, the spectacle wouldnot be devoid of either interest or charm, and we should have about usonly things that were so old that they would seem new.With the reader consent, we will endeavor to retrace in thought,the impression which he would have experienced in company with uson crossing the threshold of that grand hall, in the midst of thattumultuous crowd in surcoats, short, sleeveless jackets, and doublets.And, first of all, there is a buzzing in the ears, a dazzlement inthe eyes. Above our heads is a double ogive vault, panelled with woodcarving, painted azure, and sown with golden fleursdelis; beneathour feet a pavement of black and white marble, alternating. A few pacesdistant, an enormous pillar, then another, then another; seven pillarsin all, down the length of the hall, sustaining the spring of the archesof the double vault, in the centre of its width. Around four of thepillars, stalls of merchants, all sparkling with glass and tinsel;around the last three, benches of oak, worn and polished by the trunkhose of the litigants, and the robes of the attorneys. Around the hall,along the lofty wall, between the doors, between the windows, betweenthe pillars, the interminable row of all the kings of France, fromPharamond down: the lazy kings, with pendent arms and downcast eyes;the valiant and combative kings, with heads and arms raised boldlyheavenward. Then in the long, pointed windows, glass of a thousand hues;at the wide entrances to the hall, rich doors, finely sculptured; andall, the vaults, pillars, walls, jambs, panelling, doors, statues,covered from top to bottom with a splendid blue and gold illumination,which, a trifle tarnished at the epoch when we behold it, had almostentirely disappeared beneath dust and spiders in the year of grace,1549, when du Breul still admired it from tradition.Let the reader picture to himself now, this immense, oblong hall,illuminated by the pallid light of a January day, invaded by a motleyand noisy throng which drifts along the walls, and eddies round theseven pillars, and he will have a confused idea of the whole effect ofthe picture, whose curious details we shall make an effort to indicatewith more precision.It is certain, that if Ravaillac had not assassinated Henri IV., therewould have been no documents in the trial of Ravaillac deposited in theclerk office of the Palais de Justice, no accomplices interested incausing the said documents to disappear; hence, no incendiaries obliged,for lack of better means, to burn the clerk office in order to burnthe documents, and to burn the Palais de Justice in order to burn theclerk office; consequently, in short, no conflagration in 1618. Theold Palais would be standing still, with its ancient grand hall; Ishould be able to say to the reader, Go and look at it, and we shouldthus both escape the necessity,I of making, and he of reading, adescription of it, such as it is. Which demonstrates a new truth: thatgreat events have incalculable results.It is true that it may be quite possible, in the first place, thatRavaillac had no accomplices; and in the second, that if he had any,they were in no way connected with the fire of 1618. Two other veryplausible explanations exist: First, the great flaming star, a footbroad, and a cubit high, which fell from heaven, as every one knows,upon the law courts, after midnight on the seventh of March; second,Théophile quatrain,  Sure, twas but a sorry game  When at Paris, Dame Justice,  Through having eaten too much spice,  Set the palace all aflame.Whatever may be thought of this triple explanation, political, physical,and poetical, of the burning of the law courts in 1618, the unfortunatefact of the fire is certain. Very little today remains, thanks to thiscatastrophe,thanks, above all, to the successive restorations whichhave completed what it spared,very little remains of that firstdwelling of the kings of France,of that elder palace of the Louvre,already so old in the time of Philip the Handsome, that they soughtthere for the traces of the magnificent buildings erected by King Robertand described by Helgaldus. Nearly everything has disappeared. What hasbecome of the chamber of the chancellery, where Saint Louis consummatedhis marriage? the garden where he administered justice, clad in acoat of camelot, a surcoat of linseywoolsey, without sleeves, and asurmantle of black sandal, as he lay upon the carpet with Joinville? Where is the chamber of the Emperor Sigismond? and that of Charles IV.?that of Jean the Landless? Where is the staircase, from which CharlesVI. promulgated his edict of pardon? the slab where Marcel cut thethroats of Robert de Clermont and the Marshal of Champagne, in thepresence of the dauphin? the wicket where the bulls of Pope Benedictwere torn, and whence those who had brought them departed decked out, inderision, in copes and mitres, and making an apology through all Paris?and the grand hall, with its gilding, its azure, its statues, itspointed arches, its pillars, its immense vault, all fretted withcarvings? and the gilded chamber? and the stone lion, which stood at thedoor, with lowered head and tail between his legs, like the lions on thethrone of Solomon, in the humiliated attitude which befits force in thepresence of justice? and the beautiful doors? and the stained glass?and the chased ironwork, which drove Biscornette to despair? and thedelicate woodwork of Hancy? What has time, what have men done with thesemarvels? What have they given us in return for all this Gallic history,for all this Gothic art? The heavy flattened arches of M. de Brosse,that awkward architect of the SaintGervais portal. So much for art;and, as for history, we have the gossiping reminiscences of the greatpillar, still ringing with the tattle of the Patru.It is not much. Let us return to the veritable grand hall of theveritable old palace. The two extremities of this gigantic parallelogramwere occupied, the one by the famous marble table, so long, so broad,and so thick that, as the ancient land rollsin a style that would havegiven Gargantua an appetitesay, such a slice of marble as was neverbeheld in the world; the other by the chapel where Louis XI. hadhimself sculptured on his knees before the Virgin, and whither he causedto be brought, without heeding the two gaps thus made in the row ofroyal statues, the statues of Charlemagne and of Saint Louis, two saintswhom he supposed to be great in favor in heaven, as kings of France.This chapel, quite new, having been built only six years, was entirelyin that charming taste of delicate architecture, of marvelloussculpture, of fine and deep chasing, which marks with us the end ofthe Gothic era, and which is perpetuated to about the middle of thesixteenth century in the fairylike fancies of the Renaissance. Thelittle openwork rose window, pierced above the portal, was, inparticular, a masterpiece of lightness and grace; one would havepronounced it a star of lace.In the middle of the hall, opposite the great door, a platform of goldbrocade, placed against the wall, a special entrance to which had beeneffected through a window in the corridor of the gold chamber, hadbeen erected for the Flemish emissaries and the other great personagesinvited to the presentation of the mystery play.It was upon the marble table that the mystery was to be enacted, asusual. It had been arranged for the purpose, early in the morning;its rich slabs of marble, all scratched by the heels of law clerks,supported a cage of carpenter work of considerable height, the uppersurface of which, within view of the whole hall, was to serve as thetheatre, and whose interior, masked by tapestries, was to take the placeof dressingrooms for the personages of the piece. A ladder, naivelyplaced on the outside, was to serve as means of communication betweenthe dressingroom and the stage, and lend its rude rungs to entrances aswell as to exits. There was no personage, however unexpected, no suddenchange, no theatrical effect, which was not obliged to mount thatladder. Innocent and venerable infancy of art and contrivances!Four of the bailiff of the palace sergeants, perfunctory guardians ofall the pleasures of the people, on days of festival as well as on daysof execution, stood at the four corners of the marble table.The piece was only to begin with the twelfth stroke of the great palaceclock sounding midday. It was very late, no doubt, for a theatricalrepresentation, but they had been obliged to fix the hour to suit theconvenience of the ambassadors.Now, this whole multitude had been waiting since morning. A goodlynumber of curious, good people had been shivering since daybreak beforethe grand staircase of the palace; some even affirmed that they hadpassed the night across the threshold of the great door, in order tomake sure that they should be the first to pass in. The crowd grew moredense every moment, and, like water, which rises above its normal level,began to mount along the walls, to swell around the pillars, to spreadout on the entablatures, on the cornices, on the windowsills, onall the salient points of the architecture, on all the reliefs of thesculpture. Hence, discomfort, impatience, weariness, the liberty of aday of cynicism and folly, the quarrels which break forth for all sortsof causesa pointed elbow, an ironshod shoe, the fatigue of longwaitinghad already, long before the hour appointed for the arrivalof the ambassadors, imparted a harsh and bitter accent to the clamor ofthese people who were shut in, fitted into each other, pressed, trampledupon, stifled. Nothing was to be heard but imprecations on the Flemish,the provost of the merchants, the Cardinal de Bourbon, the bailiff ofthe courts, Madame Marguerite of Austria, the sergeants with their rods,the cold, the heat, the bad weather, the Bishop of Paris, the Pope ofthe Fools, the pillars, the statues, that closed door, that open window;all to the vast amusement of a band of scholars and lackeys scatteredthrough the mass, who mingled with all this discontent their teasingremarks, and their malicious suggestions, and pricked the general badtemper with a pin, so to speak.Among the rest there was a group of those merry imps, who, aftersmashing the glass in a window, had seated themselves hardily onthe entablature, and from that point despatched their gaze and theirrailleries both within and without, upon the throng in the hall, and thethrong upon the Place. It was easy to see, from their parodied gestures,their ringing laughter, the bantering appeals which they exchanged withtheir comrades, from one end of the hall to the other, that theseyoung clerks did not share the weariness and fatigue of the rest of thespectators, and that they understood very well the art of extracting,for their own private diversion from that which they had under theireyes, a spectacle which made them await the other with patience.Upon my soul, so it you, Joannes Frollo de Molendino!’ cried oneof them, to a sort of little, lighthaired imp, with a wellfavored andmalign countenance, clinging to the acanthus leaves of a capital; youare well named John of the Mill, for your two arms and your two legshave the air of four wings fluttering on the breeze. How long have youbeen here?By the mercy of the devil, retorted Joannes Frollo, these fourhours and more; and I hope that they will be reckoned to my credit inpurgatory. I heard the eight singers of the King of Sicily intone thefirst verse of seven o’clock mass in the SainteChapelle.Fine singers! replied the other, with voices even more pointed thantheir caps! Before founding a mass for Monsieur Saint John, the kingshould have inquired whether Monsieur Saint John likes Latin droned outin a Provençal accent.He did it for the sake of employing those accursed singers of the Kingof Sicily! cried an old woman sharply from among the crowd beneath thewindow. I just put it to you! A thousand _livres parisi_ for a mass!and out of the tax on sea fish in the markets of Paris, to boot!Peace, old crone, said a tall, grave person, stopping up his nose onthe side towards the fishwife; a mass had to be founded. Would you wishthe king to fall ill again?Bravely spoken, Sire Gilles Lecornu, master furrier of king robes! cried the little student, clinging to the capital.A shout of laughter from all the students greeted the unlucky name ofthe poor furrier of the king robes.Lecornu! Gilles Lecornu! said some._Cornutus et hirsutus_, horned and hairy, another went on.He! of course, continued the small imp on the capital, What are theylaughing at? An honorable man is Gilles Lecornu, brother of Master JehanLecornu, provost of the king house, son of Master Mahiet Lecornu,first porter of the Bois de Vincennes,all bourgeois of Paris, allmarried, from father to son.The gayety redoubled. The big furrier, without uttering a word in reply,tried to escape all the eyes riveted upon him from all sides; buthe perspired and panted in vain; like a wedge entering the wood, hisefforts served only to bury still more deeply in the shoulders of hisneighbors, his large, apoplectic face, purple with spite and rage.At length one of these, as fat, short, and venerable as himself, came tohis rescue.Abomination! scholars addressing a bourgeois in that fashion in my daywould have been flogged with a fagot, which would have afterwards beenused to burn them.The whole band burst into laughter.Holà hé! who is scolding so? Who is that screech owl of evil fortune?Hold, I know him said one of them; tis Master Andry Musnier.Because he is one of the four sworn booksellers of the university! said the other.Everything goes by fours in that shop, cried a third; the fournations, the four faculties, the four feasts, the four procurators, thefour electors, the four booksellers.Well, began Jean Frollo once more, we must play the devil withthem.    _Faire le diable a quatre_.Musnier, we’ll burn your books.Musnier, we’ll beat your lackeys.Musnier, we’ll kiss your wife.That fine, big Mademoiselle Oudarde.Who is as fresh and as gay as though she were a widow.Devil take you! growled Master Andry Musnier.Master Andry, pursued Jean Jehan, still clinging to his capital, holdyour tongue, or I’ll drop on your head!Master Andry raised his eyes, seemed to measure in an instant the heightof the pillar, the weight of the scamp, mentally multiplied that weightby the square of the velocity and remained silent.Jehan, master of the field of battle, pursued triumphantly:That what I’ll do, even if I am the brother of an archdeacon!Fine gentry are our people of the university, not to have caused ourprivileges to be respected on such a day as this! However, there is amaypole and a bonfire in the town; a mystery, Pope of the Fools, andFlemish ambassadors in the city; and, at the university, nothing!Nevertheless, the Place Maubert is sufficiently large! interposed oneof the clerks established on the windowsill.Down with the rector, the electors, and the procurators! criedJoannes.We must have a bonfire this evening in the ChampGaillard, went on theother, made of Master Andry books.And the desks of the scribes! added his neighbor.And the beadles’ wands!And the spittoons of the deans!And the cupboards of the procurators!And the hutches of the electors!And the stools of the rector!Down with them! put in little Jehan, as counterpoint; down withMaster Andry, the beadles and the scribes; the theologians, the doctorsand the decretists; the procurators, the electors and the rector!The end of the world has come!,’ muttered Master Andry, stopping up hisears.By the way, there the rector! see, he is passing through the Place, cried one of those in the window.Each rivalled his neighbor in his haste to turn towards the Place.Is it really our venerable rector, Master Thibaut? demanded JehanFrollo du Moulin, who, as he was clinging to one of the inner pillars,could not see what was going on outside.Yes, yes, replied all the others, it is really he, Master Thibaut,the rector.It was, in fact, the rector and all the dignitaries of the university,who were marching in procession in front of the embassy, and at thatmoment traversing the Place. The students crowded into the window,saluted them as they passed with sarcasms and ironical applause. Therector, who was walking at the head of his company, had to support thefirst broadside; it was severe.Good day, monsieur le recteur! Holà hé! good day there!How does he manage to be here, the old gambler? Has he abandoned hisdice?How he trots along on his mule! her ears are not so long as his!Holà hé! good day, monsieur le recteur Thibaut! _Tybalde aleator_! Oldfool! old gambler!God preserve you! Did you throw double six often last night?Oh! what a decrepit face, livid and haggard and drawn with the love ofgambling and of dice!Where are you bound for in that fashion, Thibaut, _Tybalde ad dados_,with your back turned to the university, and trotting towards the town?He is on his way, no doubt, to seek a lodging in the Rue Thibautodé? cried Jehan du M. Moulin.    _Thibaut au des_,Thibaut of the dice.The entire band repeated this quip in a voice of thunder, clapping theirhands furiously.You are going to seek a lodging in the Rue Thibautodé, are you not,monsieur le recteur, gamester on the side of the devil?Then came the turns of the other dignitaries.Down with the beadles! down with the macebearers!Tell me, Robin Pouissepain, who is that yonder?He is Gilbert de Suilly, _Gilbertus de Soliaco_, the chancellor of theCollege of Autun.Hold on, here my shoe; you are better placed than I, fling it in hisface._Saturnalitias mittimus ecce nuces_.Down with the six theologians, with their white surplices!Are those the theologians? I thought they were the white geese given bySainteGeneviève to the city, for the fief of Roogny.Down with the doctors!Down with the cardinal disputations, and quibblers!My cap to you, Chancellor of SainteGeneviève! You have done me awrong. Tis true; he gave my place in the nation of Normandy to littleAscanio Falzapada, who comes from the province of Bourges, since he isan Italian.That is an injustice, said all the scholars. Down with the Chancellorof SainteGeneviève!Ho hé! Master Joachim de Ladehors! Ho hé! Louis Dahuille! Ho he LambertHoctement!May the devil stifle the procurator of the German nation!And the chaplains of the SainteChapelle, with their gray _amices; cumtunices grisis_!_Seu de pellibus grisis fourratis_!Holà hé! Masters of Arts! All the beautiful black copes! all the finered copes!They make a fine tail for the rector.One would say that he was a Doge of Venice on his way to his bridalwith the sea.Say, Jehan! here are the canons of SainteGeneviève!To the deuce with the whole set of canons!Abbé Claude Choart! Doctor Claude Choart! Are you in search of Marie laGiffarde?She is in the Rue de Glatigny.She is making the bed of the king of the debauchees. She is paying herfour deniers _quatuor denarios_.    An old French coin, equal to the two hundred andfortieth part of a pound._Aut unum bombum_.Would you like to have her pay you in the face?Comrades! Master Simon Sanguin, the Elector of Picardy, with his wifeon the crupper!_Post equitem seclet atra eura_behind the horseman sits black care.Courage, Master Simon!Good day, Mister Elector!Good night, Madame Electress!How happy they are to see all that! sighed Joannes de Molendino, stillperched in the foliage of his capital.Meanwhile, the sworn bookseller of the university, Master Andry Musnier,was inclining his ear to the furrier of the king robes, Master GillesLecornu.I tell you, sir, that the end of the world has come. No one has everbeheld such outbreaks among the students! It is the accursed inventionsof this century that are ruining everything,artilleries, bombards,and, above all, printing, that other German pest. No more manuscripts,no more books! printing will kill bookselling. It is the end of theworld that is drawing nigh.I see that plainly, from the progress of velvet stuffs, said thefurmerchant.At this moment, midday sounded.Ha! exclaimed the entire crowd, in one voice.The scholars held their peace. Then a great hurlyburly ensued; a vastmovement of feet, hands, and heads; a general outbreak of coughs andhandkerchiefs; each one arranged himself, assumed his post, raisedhimself up, and grouped himself. Then came a great silence; all necksremained outstretched, all mouths remained open, all glances weredirected towards the marble table. Nothing made its appearance there.The bailiff four sergeants were still there, stiff, motionless, aspainted statues. All eyes turned to the estrade reserved for the Flemishenvoys. The door remained closed, the platform empty. This crowd hadbeen waiting since daybreak for three things: noonday, the embassy fromFlanders, the mystery play. Noonday alone had arrived on time.On this occasion, it was too much.They waited one, two, three, five minutes, a quarter of an hour; nothingcame. The dais remained empty, the theatre dumb. In the meantime, wrathhad succeeded to impatience. Irritated words circulated in a low tone,still, it is true. The mystery! the mystery! they murmured, in hollowvoices. Heads began to ferment. A tempest, which was only rumbling inthe distance as yet, was floating on the surface of this crowd. It wasJehan du Moulin who struck the first spark from it.The mystery, and to the devil with the Flemings! he exclaimed at thefull force of his lungs, twining like a serpent around his pillar.The crowd clapped their hands.The mystery! it repeated, and may all the devils take Flanders!We must have the mystery instantly, resumed the student; or else,my advice is that we should hang the bailiff of the courts, by way of amorality and a comedy.Well said, cried the people, and let us begin the hanging with hissergeants.A grand acclamation followed. The four poor fellows began to turn pale,and to exchange glances. The crowd hurled itself towards them, and theyalready beheld the frail wooden railing, which separated them from it,giving way and bending before the pressure of the throng.It was a critical moment.To the sack, to the sack! rose the cry on all sides.At that moment, the tapestry of the dressingroom, which we havedescribed above, was raised, and afforded passage to a personage, themere sight of whom suddenly stopped the crowd, and changed its wrathinto curiosity as by enchantment.Silence! silence!The personage, but little reassured, and trembling in every limb,advanced to the edge of the marble table with a vast amount of bows,which, in proportion as he drew nearer, more and more resembledgenuflections.In the meanwhile, tranquillity had gradually been restored. All thatremained was that slight murmur which always rises above the silence ofa crowd.Messieurs the bourgeois, said he, and mesdemoiselles the_bourgeoises_, we shall have the honor of declaiming and representing,before his eminence, monsieur the cardinal, a very beautiful moralitywhich has for its title, The Good Judgment of Madame the Virgin Mary.’I am to play Jupiter. His eminence is, at this moment, escorting thevery honorable embassy of the Duke of Austria; which is detained,at present, listening to the harangue of monsieur the rector of theuniversity, at the gate Baudets. As soon as his illustrious eminence,the cardinal, arrives, we will begin.It is certain, that nothing less than the intervention of Jupiter wasrequired to save the four unfortunate sergeants of the bailiff of thecourts. If we had the happiness of having invented this very veracioustale, and of being, in consequence, responsible for it before our LadyCriticism, it is not against us that the classic precept, _Nec deusintersit_, could be invoked. Moreover, the costume of Seigneur Jupiter,was very handsome, and contributed not a little towards calming thecrowd, by attracting all its attention. Jupiter was clad in a coat ofmail, covered with black velvet, with gilt nails; and had it not beenfor the rouge, and the huge red beard, each of which covered onehalf ofhis face,had it not been for the roll of gilded cardboard, spangled,and all bristling with strips of tinsel, which he held in his hand, andin which the eyes of the initiated easily recognized thunderbolts,hadnot his feet been fleshcolored, and banded with ribbons in Greekfashion, he might have borne comparison, so far as the severity of hismien was concerned, with a Breton archer from the guard of Monsieur deBerry.CHAPTER II. PIERRE GRINGOIRE.Nevertheless, as be harangued them, the satisfaction and admirationunanimously excited by his costume were dissipated by his words; andwhen he reached that untoward conclusion: As soon as his illustriouseminence, the cardinal, arrives, we will begin, his voice was drownedin a thunder of hooting.Begin instantly! The mystery! the mystery immediately! shrieked thepeople. And above all the voices, that of Johannes de Molendinowas audible, piercing the uproar like the fife derisive serenade:Commence instantly! yelped the scholar.Down with Jupiter and the Cardinal de Bourbon! vociferated RobinPoussepain and the other clerks perched in the window.The morality this very instant! repeated the crowd; this veryinstant! the sack and the rope for the comedians, and the cardinal!Poor Jupiter, haggard, frightened, pale beneath his rouge, dropped histhunderbolt, took his cap in his hand; then he bowed and trembledand stammered: His eminencethe ambassadorsMadame Marguerite ofFlanders. He did not know what to say. In truth, he was afraid ofbeing hung.Hung by the populace for waiting, hung by the cardinal for not havingwaited, he saw between the two dilemmas only an abyss; that is to say, agallows.Luckily, some one came to rescue him from his embarrassment, and assumethe responsibility.An individual who was standing beyond the railing, in the free spacearound the marble table, and whom no one had yet caught sight of, sincehis long, thin body was completely sheltered from every visual rayby the diameter of the pillar against which he was leaning; thisindividual, we say, tall, gaunt, pallid, blond, still young, althoughalready wrinkled about the brow and cheeks, with brilliant eyes and asmiling mouth, clad in garments of black serge, worn and shining withage, approached the marble table, and made a sign to the poor sufferer.But the other was so confused that he did not see him. The new comeradvanced another step.Jupiter, said he, my dear Jupiter!The other did not hear.At last, the tall blond, driven out of patience, shrieked almost in hisface,Michel Giborne!Who calls me? said Jupiter, as though awakened with a start.I, replied the person clad in black.Ah! said Jupiter.Begin at once, went on the other. Satisfy the populace; I undertaketo appease the bailiff, who will appease monsieur the cardinal.Jupiter breathed once more.Messeigneurs the bourgeois, he cried, at the top of his lungs to thecrowd, which continued to hoot him, we are going to begin at once._Evoe Jupiter! Plaudite cives_! All hail, Jupiter! Applaud, citizens! shouted the scholars.Noel! Noel! good, good, shouted the people.The hand clapping was deafening, and Jupiter had already withdrawn underhis tapestry, while the hall still trembled with acclamations.In the meanwhile, the personage who had so magically turned the tempestinto dead calm, as our old and dear Corneille puts it, had modestlyretreated to the halfshadow of his pillar, and would, no doubt, haveremained invisible there, motionless, and mute as before, had he notbeen plucked by the sleeve by two young women, who, standing in thefront row of the spectators, had noticed his colloquy with MichelGiborneJupiter.Master, said one of them, making him a sign to approach. Hold yourtongue, my dear Liénarde, said her neighbor, pretty, fresh, and verybrave, in consequence of being dressed up in her best attire. He is nota clerk, he is a layman; you must not say master to him, but messire.Messire, said Liénarde.The stranger approached the railing.What would you have of me, damsels? he asked, with alacrity.Oh! nothing, replied Liénarde, in great confusion; it is my neighbor,Gisquette la Gencienne, who wishes to speak with you.Not so, replied Gisquette, blushing; it was Liénarde who called youmaster; I only told her to say messire.The two young girls dropped their eyes. The man, who asked nothingbetter than to enter into conversation, looked at them with a smile.So you have nothing to say to me, damsels?Oh! nothing at all, replied Gisquette.Nothing, said Liénarde.The tall, lighthaired young man retreated a step; but the two curiousmaidens had no mind to let slip their prize.Messire, said Gisquette, with the impetuosity of an open sluice, orof a woman who has made up her mind, do you know that soldier who is toplay the part of Madame the Virgin in the mystery?You mean the part of Jupiter? replied the stranger.Hé! yes, said Liénarde, isn’t she stupid? So you know Jupiter?Michel Giborne? replied the unknown; yes, madam.He has a fine beard! said Liénarde.Will what they are about to say here be fine? inquired Gisquette,timidly.Very fine, mademoiselle, replied the unknown, without the slightesthesitation.What is it to be? said Liénarde.The Good Judgment of Madame the Virgin,’a morality, if you please,damsel.Ah! that makes a difference, responded Liénarde.A brief silence ensuedbroken by the stranger.It is a perfectly new morality, and one which has never yet beenplayed.Then it is not the same one, said Gisquette, that was given two yearsago, on the day of the entrance of monsieur the legate, and where threehandsome maids played the partsOf sirens, said Liénarde.And all naked, added the young man.Liénarde lowered her eyes modestly. Gisquette glanced at her and did thesame. He continued, with a smile,It was a very pleasant thing to see. Today it is a morality madeexpressly for Madame the Demoiselle of Flanders.Will they sing shepherd songs? inquired Gisquette.Fie! said the stranger, in a morality? you must not confound styles.If it were a farce, well and good.That is a pity, resumed Gisquette. That day, at the Ponceau Fountain,there were wild men and women, who fought and assumed many aspects, asthey sang little motets and bergerettes.That which is suitable for a legate, returned the stranger, with agood deal of dryness, is not suitable for a princess.And beside them, resumed Liénarde, played many brass instruments,making great melodies.And for the refreshment of the passersby, continued Gisquette, thefountain spouted through three mouths, wine, milk, and hippocrass, ofwhich every one drank who wished.And a little below the Ponceau, at the Trinity, pursued Liénarde,there was a passion performed, and without any speaking.How well I remember that! exclaimed Gisquette; God on the cross,and the two thieves on the right and the left. Here the young gossips,growing warm at the memory of the entrance of monsieur the legate, bothbegan to talk at once.And, further on, at the Painters’ Gate, there were other personages,very richly clad.And at the fountain of SaintInnocent, that huntsman, who was chasing ahind with great clamor of dogs and huntinghorns.And, at the Paris slaughterhouses, stages, representing the fortressof Dieppe!And when the legate passed, you remember, Gisquette? they made theassault, and the English all had their throats cut.And against the gate of the Châtelet, there were very fine personages!And on the Port au Change, which was all draped above!And when the legate passed, they let fly on the bridge more than twohundred sorts of birds; wasn’t it beautiful, Liénarde?It will be better today, finally resumed their interlocutor, whoseemed to listen to them with impatience.Do you promise us that this mystery will be fine? said Gisquette.Without doubt, he replied; then he added, with a certain emphasis,Iam the author of it, damsels.Truly? said the young girls, quite taken aback.Truly! replied the poet, bridling a little; that is, to say, thereare two of us; Jehan Marchand, who has sawed the planks and erectedthe framework of the theatre and the woodwork; and I, who have made thepiece. My name is Pierre Gringoire.The author of the Cid could not have said Pierre Corneille with morepride.Our readers have been able to observe, that a certain amount of timemust have already elapsed from the moment when Jupiter had retiredbeneath the tapestry to the instant when the author of the new moralityhad thus abruptly revealed himself to the innocent admiration ofGisquette and Liénarde. Remarkable fact: that whole crowd, so tumultuousbut a few moments before, now waited amiably on the word of thecomedian; which proves the eternal truth, still experienced every day inour theatres, that the best means of making the public wait patiently isto assure them that one is about to begin instantly.However, scholar Johannes had not fallen asleep.Holà hé! he shouted suddenly, in the midst of the peaceable waitingwhich had followed the tumult. Jupiter, Madame the Virgin, buffoons ofthe devil! are you jeering at us? The piece! the piece! commence or wewill commence again!This was all that was needed.The music of high and low instruments immediately became audible fromthe interior of the stage; the tapestry was raised; four personages,in motley attire and painted faces, emerged from it, climbed the steepladder of the theatre, and, arrived upon the upper platform, arrangedthemselves in a line before the public, whom they saluted with profoundreverences; then the symphony ceased.The mystery was about to begin.The four personages, after having reaped a rich reward of applause fortheir reverences, began, in the midst of profound silence, a prologue,which we gladly spare the reader. Moreover, as happens in our own day,the public was more occupied with the costumes that the actors wore thanwith the roles that they were enacting; and, in truth, they were right.All four were dressed in particolored robes of yellow and white, whichwere distinguished from each other only by the nature of the stuff; thefirst was of gold and silver brocade; the second, of silk; the third, ofwool; the fourth, of linen. The first of these personages carried in hisright hand a sword; the second, two golden keys; the third, a pair ofscales; the fourth, a spade: and, in order to aid sluggish mindswhich would not have seen clearly through the transparency of theseattributes, there was to be read, in large, black letters, on the hem ofthe robe of brocade, MY NAME IS NOBILITY; on the hem of the silkenrobe, MY NAME IS CLERGY; on the hem of the woolen robe, MY NAME ISMERCHANDISE; on the hem of the linen robe, MY NAME IS LABOR. The sexof the two male characters was briefly indicated to every judiciousspectator, by their shorter robes, and by the cap which they wore ontheir heads; while the two female characters, less briefly clad, werecovered with hoods.Much illwill would also have been required, not to comprehend, throughthe medium of the poetry of the prologue, that Labor was wedded toMerchandise, and Clergy to Nobility, and that the two happy couplespossessed in common a magnificent golden dolphin, which they desiredto adjudge to the fairest only. So they were roaming about the worldseeking and searching for this beauty, and, after having successivelyrejected the Queen of Golconda, the Princess of Trebizonde, the daughterof the Grand Khan of Tartary, etc., Labor and Clergy, Nobility andMerchandise, had come to rest upon the marble table of the Palais deJustice, and to utter, in the presence of the honest audience, as manysentences and maxims as could then be dispensed at the Faculty of Arts,at examinations, sophisms, determinances, figures, and acts, where themasters took their degrees.All this was, in fact, very fine.Nevertheless, in that throng, upon which the four allegories vied witheach other in pouring out floods of metaphors, there was no ear moreattentive, no heart that palpitated more, not an eye was more haggard,no neck more outstretched, than the eye, the ear, the neck, and theheart of the author, of the poet, of that brave Pierre Gringoire, whohad not been able to resist, a moment before, the joy of telling hisname to two pretty girls. He had retreated a few paces from them, behindhis pillar, and there he listened, looked, enjoyed. The amiable applausewhich had greeted the beginning of his prologue was still echoing inhis bosom, and he was completely absorbed in that species of ecstaticcontemplation with which an author beholds his ideas fall, one by one,from the mouth of the actor into the vast silence of the audience.Worthy Pierre Gringoire!It pains us to say it, but this first ecstasy was speedily disturbed.Hardly had Gringoire raised this intoxicating cup of joy and triumph tohis lips, when a drop of bitterness was mingled with it.A tattered mendicant, who could not collect any coins, lost as he wasin the midst of the crowd, and who had not probably found sufficientindemnity in the pockets of his neighbors, had hit upon the idea ofperching himself upon some conspicuous point, in order to attract looksand alms. He had, accordingly, hoisted himself, during the first versesof the prologue, with the aid of the pillars of the reserve gallery, tothe cornice which ran round the balustrade at its lower edge; and therehe had seated himself, soliciting the attention and the pity of themultitude, with his rags and a hideous sore which covered his right arm.However, he uttered not a word.The silence which he preserved allowed the prologue to proceed withouthindrance, and no perceptible disorder would have ensued, if illluckhad not willed that the scholar Joannes should catch sight, from theheights of his pillar, of the mendicant and his grimaces. A wild fit oflaughter took possession of the young scamp, who, without caring that hewas interrupting the spectacle, and disturbing the universal composure,shouted boldly,Look! see that sickly creature asking alms!Any one who has thrown a stone into a frog pond, or fired a shot intoa covey of birds, can form an idea of the effect produced by theseincongruous words, in the midst of the general attention. It madeGringoire shudder as though it had been an electric shock. The prologuestopped short, and all heads turned tumultuously towards the beggar,who, far from being disconcerted by this, saw, in this incident, a goodopportunity for reaping his harvest, and who began to whine in a dolefulway, half closing his eyes the while,Charity, please!Wellupon my soul, resumed Joannes, it Clopin Trouillefou! Holàhe, my friend, did your sore bother you on the leg, that you havetransferred it to your arm? So saying, with the dexterity of a monkey,he flung a bit of silver into the gray felt hat which the beggar heldin his ailing arm. The mendicant received both the alms and the sarcasmwithout wincing, and continued, in lamentable tones,Charity, please!This episode considerably distracted the attention of the audience; anda goodly number of spectators, among them Robin Poussepain, and all theclerks at their head, gayly applauded this eccentric duet, which thescholar, with his shrill voice, and the mendicant had just improvised inthe middle of the prologue.Gringoire was highly displeased. On recovering from his firststupefaction, he bestirred himself to shout, to the four personages onthe stage, Go on! What the devil!go on!without even deigning tocast a glance of disdain upon the two interrupters.At that moment, he felt some one pluck at the hem of his surtout;he turned round, and not without illhumor, and found considerabledifficulty in smiling; but he was obliged to do so, nevertheless. Itwas the pretty arm of Gisquette la Gencienne, which, passed through therailing, was soliciting his attention in this manner.Monsieur, said the young girl, are they going to continue?Of course, replied Gringoire, a good deal shocked by the question.In that case, messire, she resumed, would you have the courtesy toexplain to meWhat they are about to say? interrupted Gringoire. Well, listen.No, said Gisquette, but what they have said so far.Gringoire started, like a man whose wound has been probed to the quick.A plague on the stupid and dullwitted little girl! he muttered,between his teeth.From that moment forth, Gisquette was nothing to him.In the meantime, the actors had obeyed his injunction, and the public,seeing that they were beginning to speak again, began once more tolisten, not without having lost many beauties in the sort of solderedjoint which was formed between the two portions of the piece thusabruptly cut short. Gringoire commented on it bitterly to himself.Nevertheless, tranquillity was gradually restored, the scholar held hispeace, the mendicant counted over some coins in his hat, and the pieceresumed the upper hand.It was, in fact, a very fine work, and one which, as it seems to us,might be put to use today, by the aid of a little rearrangement. Theexposition, rather long and rather empty, that is to say, according tothe rules, was simple; and Gringoire, in the candid sanctuary of his ownconscience, admired its clearness. As the reader may surmise, the fourallegorical personages were somewhat weary with having traversed thethree sections of the world, without having found suitable opportunityfor getting rid of their golden dolphin. Thereupon a eulogy of themarvellous fish, with a thousand delicate allusions to the youngbetrothed of Marguerite of Flanders, then sadly cloistered in atAmboise, and without a suspicion that Labor and Clergy, Nobility andMerchandise had just made the circuit of the world in his behalf. Thesaid dauphin was then young, was handsome, was stout, and, above all(magnificent origin of all royal virtues), he was the son of the Lionof France. I declare that this bold metaphor is admirable, and that thenatural history of the theatre, on a day of allegory and royal marriagesongs, is not in the least startled by a dolphin who is the son of alion. It is precisely these rare and Pindaric mixtures which prove thepoet enthusiasm. Nevertheless, in order to play the part of criticalso, the poet might have developed this beautiful idea in somethingless than two hundred lines. It is true that the mystery was to lastfrom noon until four o’clock, in accordance with the orders of monsieurthe provost, and that it was necessary to say something. Besides, thepeople listened patiently.All at once, in the very middle of a quarrel between MademoiselleMerchandise and Madame Nobility, at the moment when Monsieur Labor wasgiving utterance to this wonderful line,  In forest ne’er was seen a more triumphant beast;the door of the reserved gallery which had hitherto remained soinopportunely closed, opened still more inopportunely; and the ringingvoice of the usher announced abruptly, His eminence, Monseigneur theCardinal de Bourbon.CHAPTER III. MONSIEUR THE CARDINAL.Poor Gringoire! the din of all the great double petards of theSaintJean, the discharge of twenty arquebuses on supports, thedetonation of that famous serpentine of the Tower of Billy, which,during the siege of Paris, on Sunday, the twentysixth of September,1465, killed seven Burgundians at one blow, the explosion of all thepowder stored at the gate of the Temple, would have rent his ears lessrudely at that solemn and dramatic moment, than these few words, whichfell from the lips of the usher, His eminence, Monseigneur the Cardinalde Bourbon.It is not that Pierre Gringoire either feared or disdained monsieur thecardinal. He had neither the weakness nor the audacity for that. A trueeclectic, as it would be expressed nowadays, Gringoire was one of thosefirm and lofty, moderate and calm spirits, which always know how to bearthemselves amid all circumstances (_stare in dimidio rerum_), and whoare full of reason and of liberal philosophy, while still settingstore by cardinals. A rare, precious, and never interrupted race ofphilosophers to whom wisdom, like another Ariadne, seems to have givena clew of thread which they have been walking along unwinding sincethe beginning of the world, through the labyrinth of human affairs. Onefinds them in all ages, ever the same; that is to say, always accordingto all times. And, without reckoning our Pierre Gringoire, who mayrepresent them in the fifteenth century if we succeed in bestowing uponhim the distinction which he deserves, it certainly was their spiritwhich animated Father du Breul, when he wrote, in the sixteenth, thesenaively sublime words, worthy of all centuries: I am a Parisian bynation, and a Parrhisian in language, for _parrhisia_ in Greek signifiesliberty of speech; of which I have made use even towards messeigneursthe cardinals, uncle and brother to Monsieur the Prince de Conty, alwayswith respect to their greatness, and without offending any one of theirsuite, which is much to say.There was then neither hatred for the cardinal, nor disdain for hispresence, in the disagreeable impression produced upon Pierre Gringoire.Quite the contrary; our poet had too much good sense and too threadbarea coat, not to attach particular importance to having the numerousallusions in his prologue, and, in particular, the glorification of thedauphin, son of the Lion of France, fall upon the most eminent ear. Butit is not interest which predominates in the noble nature of poets. Isuppose that the entity of the poet may be represented by the numberten; it is certain that a chemist on analyzing and pharmacopolizing it,as Rabelais says, would find it composed of one part interest to nineparts of selfesteem.Now, at the moment when the door had opened to admit the cardinal, thenine parts of selfesteem in Gringoire, swollen and expanded bythe breath of popular admiration, were in a state of prodigiousaugmentation, beneath which disappeared, as though stifled, thatimperceptible molecule of which we have just remarked upon in theconstitution of poets; a precious ingredient, by the way, a ballastof reality and humanity, without which they would not touch the earth.Gringoire enjoyed seeing, feeling, fingering, so to speak an entireassembly (of knaves, it is true, but what matters that?) stupefied,petrified, and as though asphyxiated in the presence of theincommensurable tirades which welled up every instant from all partsof his bridal song. I affirm that he shared the general beatitude, andthat, quite the reverse of La Fontaine, who, at the presentation of hiscomedy of the Florentine, asked, Who is the illbred lout who madethat rhapsody? Gringoire would gladly have inquired of his neighbor,Whose masterpiece is this?The reader can now judge of the effect produced upon him by the abruptand unseasonable arrival of the cardinal.That which he had to fear was only too fully realized. The entrance ofhis eminence upset the audience. All heads turned towards the gallery.It was no longer possible to hear one self. The cardinal! Thecardinal! repeated all mouths. The unhappy prologue stopped short forthe second time.The cardinal halted for a moment on the threshold of the estrade. Whilehe was sending a rather indifferent glance around the audience, thetumult redoubled. Each person wished to get a better view of him.Each man vied with the other in thrusting his head over his neighborshoulder.He was, in fact, an exalted personage, the sight of whom was well worthany other comedy. Charles, Cardinal de Bourbon, Archbishop and Comte ofLyon, Primate of the Gauls, was allied both to Louis XI., through hisbrother, Pierre, Seigneur de Beaujeu, who had married the king eldestdaughter, and to Charles the Bold through his mother, Agnes of Burgundy.Now, the dominating trait, the peculiar and distinctive trait of thecharacter of the Primate of the Gauls, was the spirit of the courtier,and devotion to the powers that be. The reader can form an idea of thenumberless embarrassments which this double relationship had caused him,and of all the temporal reefs among which his spiritual bark had beenforced to tack, in order not to suffer shipwreck on either Louis orCharles, that Scylla and that Charybdis which had devoured the Duc deNemours and the Constable de SaintPol. Thanks to Heaven mercy, he hadmade the voyage successfully, and had reached home without hindrance.But although he was in port, and precisely because he was in port, henever recalled without disquiet the varied haps of his political career,so long uneasy and laborious. Thus, he was in the habit of saying thatthe year 1476 had been white and black for himmeaning thereby, thatin the course of that year he had lost his mother, the Duchesse de laBourbonnais, and his cousin, the Duke of Burgundy, and that one griefhad consoled him for the other.Nevertheless, he was a fine man; he led a joyous cardinal life, likedto enliven himself with the royal vintage of Challuau, did not hateRicharde la Garmoise and Thomasse la Saillarde, bestowed alms on prettygirls rather than on old women,and for all these reasons was veryagreeable to the populace of Paris. He never went about otherwisethan surrounded by a small court of bishops and abbés of high lineage,gallant, jovial, and given to carousing on occasion; and more than oncethe good and devout women of Saint Germain d’ Auxerre, when passingat night beneath the brightly illuminated windows of Bourbon, had beenscandalized to hear the same voices which had intoned vespers forthem during the day carolling, to the clinking of glasses, the bacchicproverb of Benedict XII., that pope who had added a third crown to theTiara_Bibamus papaliter_.It was this justly acquired popularity, no doubt, which preserved him onhis entrance from any bad reception at the hands of the mob, which hadbeen so displeased but a moment before, and very little disposed torespect a cardinal on the very day when it was to elect a pope. But theParisians cherish little rancor; and then, having forced the beginningof the play by their authority, the good bourgeois had got the upperhand of the cardinal, and this triumph was sufficient for them.Moreover, the Cardinal de Bourbon was a handsome man,he wore a finescarlet robe, which he carried off very well,that is to say, he hadall the women on his side, and, consequently, the best half of theaudience. Assuredly, it would be injustice and bad taste to hoot acardinal for having come late to the spectacle, when he is a handsomeman, and when he wears his scarlet robe well.He entered, then, bowed to those present with the hereditary smile ofthe great for the people, and directed his course slowly towards hisscarlet velvet armchair, with the air of thinking of something quitedifferent. His cortegewhat we should nowadays call his staffofbishops and abbés invaded the estrade in his train, not without causingredoubled tumult and curiosity among the audience. Each man vied withhis neighbor in pointing them out and naming them, in seeing who shouldrecognize at least one of them: this one, the Bishop of Marseilles(Alaudet, if my memory serves me right);this one, the primicier ofSaintDenis;this one, Robert de Lespinasse, Abbé of SaintGermain desPrés, that libertine brother of a mistress of Louis XI.; all with manyerrors and absurdities. As for the scholars, they swore. This was theirday, their feast of fools, their saturnalia, the annual orgy of thecorporation of Law clerks and of the school. There was no turpitudewhich was not sacred on that day. And then there were gay gossips in thecrowdSimone Quatrelivres, Agnes la Gadine, and Rabine Piédebou. Wasit not the least that one could do to swear at one ease and revilethe name of God a little, on so fine a day, in such good company asdignitaries of the church and loose women? So they did not abstain; and,in the midst of the uproar, there was a frightful concert of blasphemiesand enormities of all the unbridled tongues, the tongues of clerks andstudents restrained during the rest of the year, by the fear of the hotiron of Saint Louis. Poor Saint Louis! how they set him at defiance inhis own court of law! Each one of them selected from the newcomers onthe platform, a black, gray, white, or violet cassock as his target.Joannes Frollo de Molendin, in his quality of brother to an archdeacon,boldly attacked the scarlet; he sang in deafening tones, with hisimpudent eyes fastened on the cardinal, _Cappa repleta mero_!All these details which we here lay bare for the edification of thereader, were so covered by the general uproar, that they were lost in itbefore reaching the reserved platforms; moreover, they would havemoved the cardinal but little, so much a part of the customs were theliberties of that day. Moreover, he had another cause for solicitude,and his mien as wholly preoccupied with it, which entered the estradethe same time as himself; this was the embassy from Flanders.Not that he was a profound politician, nor was he borrowing troubleabout the possible consequences of the marriage of his cousin Margueritede Bourgoyne to his cousin Charles, Dauphin de Vienne; nor as to howlong the good understanding which had been patched up between theDuke of Austria and the King of France would last; nor how the King ofEngland would take this disdain of his daughter. All that troubled himbut little; and he gave a warm reception every evening to the wine ofthe royal vintage of Chaillot, without a suspicion that several flasksof that same wine (somewhat revised and corrected, it is true, by DoctorCoictier), cordially offered to Edward IV. by Louis XI., would, somefine morning, rid Louis XI. of Edward IV. The much honored embassy ofMonsieur the Duke of Austria, brought the cardinal none of these cares,but it troubled him in another direction. It was, in fact, somewhathard, and we have already hinted at it on the second page of thisbook,for him, Charles de Bourbon, to be obliged to feast and receivecordially no one knows what bourgeois;for him, a cardinal, to receivealdermen;for him, a Frenchman, and a jolly companion, to receiveFlemish beerdrinkers,and that in public! This was, certainly, oneof the most irksome grimaces that he had ever executed for the goodpleasure of the king.So he turned toward the door, and with the best grace in the world(so well had he trained himself to it), when the usher announced, in asonorous voice, Messieurs the Envoys of Monsieur the Duke of Austria. It is useless to add that the whole hall did the same.Then arrived, two by two, with a gravity which made a contrast in themidst of the frisky ecclesiastical escort of Charles de Bourbon, theeight and forty ambassadors of Maximilian of Austria, having attheir head the reverend Father in God, Jehan, Abbot of SaintBertin,Chancellor of the Golden Fleece, and Jacques de Goy, Sieur Dauby, GrandBailiff of Ghent. A deep silence settled over the assembly, accompaniedby stifled laughter at the preposterous names and all the bourgeoisdesignations which each of these personages transmitted withimperturbable gravity to the usher, who then tossed names and titlespellmell and mutilated to the crowd below. There were Master LoysRoelof, alderman of the city of Louvain; Messire Clays d’Etuelde,alderman of Brussels; Messire Paul de Baeust, Sieur de Voirmizelle,President of Flanders; Master Jehan Coleghens, burgomaster of the cityof Antwerp; Master George de la Moere, first alderman of the kuere ofthe city of Ghent; Master Gheldolf van der Hage, first alderman of the_parchous_ of the said town; and the Sieur de Bierbecque, and JehanPinnock, and Jehan Dymaerzelle, etc., etc., etc.; bailiffs, aldermen,burgomasters; burgomasters, aldermen, bailiffsall stiff, affectedlygrave, formal, dressed out in velvet and damask, hooded with caps ofblack velvet, with great tufts of Cyprus gold thread; good Flemishheads, after all, severe and worthy faces, of the family which Rembrandtmakes to stand out so strong and grave from the black background of hisNight Patrol ; personages all of whom bore, written on their brows,that Maximilian of Austria had done well in trusting implicitly, asthe manifest ran, in their sense, valor, experience, loyalty, and goodwisdom.There was one exception, however. It was a subtle, intelligent,craftylooking face, a sort of combined monkey and diplomat phiz, beforewhom the cardinal made three steps and a profound bow, and whose name,nevertheless, was only, Guillaume Rym, counsellor and pensioner of theCity of Ghent.Few persons were then aware who Guillaume Rym was. A rare genius whoin a time of revolution would have made a brilliant appearance on thesurface of events, but who in the fifteenth century was reduced tocavernous intrigues, and to living in mines, as the Duc de SaintSimonexpresses it. Nevertheless, he was appreciated by the miner of Europe;he plotted familiarly with Louis XI., and often lent a hand to theking secret jobs. All which things were quite unknown to that throng,who were amazed at the cardinal politeness to that frail figure of aFlemish bailiff.CHAPTER IV. MASTER JACQUES COPPENOLE.While the pensioner of Ghent and his eminence were exchanging very lowbows and a few words in voices still lower, a man of lofty stature, witha large face and broad shoulders, presented himself, in order to enterabreast with Guillaume Rym; one would have pronounced him a bulldog bythe side of a fox. His felt doublet and leather jerkin made a spot onthe velvet and silk which surrounded him. Presuming that he was somegroom who had stolen in, the usher stopped him.Hold, my friend, you cannot pass!The man in the leather jerkin shouldered him aside.What does this knave want with me? said he, in stentorian tones, whichrendered the entire hall attentive to this strange colloquy. Don’t yousee that I am one of them?Your name? demanded the usher.Jacques Coppenole.Your titles?Hosier at the sign of the Three Little Chains,’ of Ghent.The usher recoiled. One might bring one self to announce aldermen andburgomasters, but a hosier was too much. The cardinal was on thorns.All the people were staring and listening. For two days his eminence hadbeen exerting his utmost efforts to lick these Flemish bears into shape,and to render them a little more presentable to the public, and thisfreak was startling. But Guillaume Rym, with his polished smile,approached the usher.Announce Master Jacques Coppenole, clerk of the aldermen of the city ofGhent, he whispered, very low.Usher, interposed the cardinal, aloud, announce Master JacquesCoppenole, clerk of the aldermen of the illustrious city of Ghent.This was a mistake. Guillaume Rym alone might have conjured away thedifficulty, but Coppenole had heard the cardinal.No, cross of God? he exclaimed, in his voice of thunder, JacquesCoppenole, hosier. Do you hear, usher? Nothing more, nothing less. Crossof God! hosier; that fine enough. Monsieur the Archduke has more thanonce sought his _gant_ in my hose.    Got the first idea of a timing.Laughter and applause burst forth. A jest is always understood in Paris,and, consequently, always applauded.Let us add that Coppenole was of the people, and that the auditors whichsurrounded him were also of the people. Thus the communication betweenhim and them had been prompt, electric, and, so to speak, on a level.The haughty air of the Flemish hosier, by humiliating the courtiers,had touched in all these plebeian souls that latent sentiment of dignitystill vague and indistinct in the fifteenth century.This hosier was an equal, who had just held his own before monsieur thecardinal. A very sweet reflection to poor fellows habituated to respectand obedience towards the underlings of the sergeants of the bailiff ofSainteGeneviève, the cardinal trainbearer.Coppenole proudly saluted his eminence, who returned the salute of theallpowerful bourgeois feared by Louis XI. Then, while Guillaume Rym, asage and malicious man, as Philippe de Comines puts it, watched themboth with a smile of raillery and superiority, each sought his place,the cardinal quite abashed and troubled, Coppenole tranquil and haughty,and thinking, no doubt, that his title of hosier was as good as anyother, after all, and that Marie of Burgundy, mother to that Margueritewhom Coppenole was today bestowing in marriage, would have been lessafraid of the cardinal than of the hosier; for it is not a cardinalwho would have stirred up a revolt among the men of Ghent against thefavorites of the daughter of Charles the Bold; it is not a cardinalwho could have fortified the populace with a word against her tearsand prayers, when the Maid of Flanders came to supplicate her people intheir behalf, even at the very foot of the scaffold; while the hosierhad only to raise his leather elbow, in order to cause to fall yourtwo heads, most illustrious seigneurs, Guy d’Hymbercourt and ChancellorGuillaume Hugonet.Nevertheless, all was over for the poor cardinal, and he was obliged toquaff to the dregs the bitter cup of being in such bad company.The reader has, probably, not forgotten the impudent beggar who had beenclinging fast to the fringes of the cardinal gallery ever since thebeginning of the prologue. The arrival of the illustrious guests hadby no means caused him to relax his hold, and, while the prelatesand ambassadors were packing themselves into the stallslike genuineFlemish herringshe settled himself at his ease, and boldly crossedhis legs on the architrave. The insolence of this proceeding wasextraordinary, yet no one noticed it at first, the attention of allbeing directed elsewhere. He, on his side, perceived nothing thatwas going on in the hall; he wagged his head with the unconcern of aNeapolitan, repeating from time to time, amid the clamor, as from amechanical habit, Charity, please! And, assuredly, he was, out of allthose present, the only one who had not deigned to turn his head at thealtercation between Coppenole and the usher. Now, chance ordained thatthe master hosier of Ghent, with whom the people were already in livelysympathy, and upon whom all eyes were rivetedshould come and seathimself in the front row of the gallery, directly above the mendicant;and people were not a little amazed to see the Flemish ambassador, onconcluding his inspection of the knave thus placed beneath his eyes,bestow a friendly tap on that ragged shoulder. The beggar turned round;there was surprise, recognition, a lighting up of the two countenances,and so forth; then, without paying the slightest heed in the world tothe spectators, the hosier and the wretched being began to converse in alow tone, holding each other hands, in the meantime, while the ragsof Clopin Trouillefou, spread out upon the cloth of gold of the dais,produced the effect of a caterpillar on an orange.The novelty of this singular scene excited such a murmur of mirth andgayety in the hall, that the cardinal was not slow to perceive it; hehalf bent forward, and, as from the point where he was placed he couldcatch only an imperfect view of Trouillerfou ignominious doublet,he very naturally imagined that the mendicant was asking alms, and,disgusted with his audacity, he exclaimed: Bailiff of the Courts, tossme that knave into the river!Cross of God! monseigneur the cardinal, said Coppenole, withoutquitting Clopin hand, he a friend of mine.Good! good! shouted the populace. From that moment, Master Coppenoleenjoyed in Paris as in Ghent, great favor with the people; for men ofthat sort do enjoy it, says Philippe de Comines, when they are thusdisorderly. The cardinal bit his lips. He bent towards his neighbor,the Abbé of Saint Geneviéve, and said to him in a low tone,Fineambassadors monsieur the archduke sends here, to announce to us MadameMarguerite!Your eminence, replied the abbé, wastes your politeness on theseFlemish swine. _Margaritas ante porcos_, pearls before swine.Say rather, retorted the cardinal, with a smile, _Porcos anteMargaritam_, swine before the pearl.The whole little court in cassocks went into ecstacies over this playupon words. The cardinal felt a little relieved; he was quits withCoppenole, he also had had his jest applauded.Now, will those of our readers who possess the power of generalizing animage or an idea, as the expression runs in the style of today, permitus to ask them if they have formed a very clear conception of thespectacle presented at this moment, upon which we have arrested theirattention, by the vast parallelogram of the grand hall of the palace.In the middle of the hall, backed against the western wall, a largeand magnificent gallery draped with cloth of gold, into which enter inprocession, through a small, arched door, grave personages, announcedsuccessively by the shrill voice of an usher. On the front benches werealready a number of venerable figures, muffled in ermine, velvet, andscarlet. Around the daiswhich remains silent and dignifiedbelow,opposite, everywhere, a great crowd and a great murmur. Thousands ofglances directed by the people on each face upon the dais, a thousandwhispers over each name. Certainly, the spectacle is curious, and welldeserves the attention of the spectators. But yonder, quite at the end,what is that sort of trestle work with four motley puppets upon it, andmore below? Who is that man beside the trestle, with a black doubletand a pale face? Alas! my dear reader, it is Pierre Gringoire and hisprologue.We have all forgotten him completely.This is precisely what he feared.From the moment of the cardinal entrance, Gringoire had never ceasedto tremble for the safety of his prologue. At first he had enjoined theactors, who had stopped in suspense, to continue, and to raise theirvoices; then, perceiving that no one was listening, he had stopped them;and, during the entire quarter of an hour that the interruption lasted,he had not ceased to stamp, to flounce about, to appeal to Gisquette andLiénarde, and to urge his neighbors to the continuance of the prologue;all in vain. No one quitted the cardinal, the embassy, and thegallerysole centre of this vast circle of visual rays. We must alsobelieve, and we say it with regret, that the prologue had begun slightlyto weary the audience at the moment when his eminence had arrived, andcreated a diversion in so terrible a fashion. After all, on the galleryas well as on the marble table, the spectacle was the same: the conflictof Labor and Clergy, of Nobility and Merchandise. And many peoplepreferred to see them alive, breathing, moving, elbowing each other inflesh and blood, in this Flemish embassy, in this Episcopal court, underthe cardinal robe, under Coppenole jerkin, than painted, deckedout, talking in verse, and, so to speak, stuffed beneath the yellow amidwhite tunics in which Gringoire had so ridiculously clothed them.Nevertheless, when our poet beheld quiet reestablished to some extent,he devised a stratagem which might have redeemed all.Monsieur, he said, turning towards one of his neighbors, a fine, bigman, with a patient face, suppose we begin again.What? said his neighbor.Hé! the Mystery, said Gringoire.As you like, returned his neighbor.This semiapprobation sufficed for Gringoire, and, conducting his ownaffairs, he began to shout, confounding himself with the crowd as muchas possible: Begin the mystery again! begin again!The devil! said Joannes de Molendino, what are they jabbering downyonder, at the end of the hall? (for Gringoire was making noise enoughfor four.) Say, comrades, isn’t that mystery finished? They want tobegin it all over again. That not fair!No, no! shouted all the scholars. Down with the mystery! Down withit!But Gringoire had multiplied himself, and only shouted the morevigorously: Begin again! begin again!These clamors attracted the attention of the cardinal.Monsieur Bailiff of the Courts, said he to a tall, black man, placed afew paces from him, are those knaves in a holywater vessel, that theymake such a hellish noise?The bailiff of the courts was a sort of amphibious magistrate, a sortof bat of the judicial order, related to both the rat and the bird, thejudge and the soldier.He approached his eminence, and not without a good deal of fear ofthe latter displeasure, he awkwardly explained to him the seemingdisrespect of the audience: that noonday had arrived before hiseminence, and that the comedians had been forced to begin withoutwaiting for his eminence.The cardinal burst into a laugh.On my faith, the rector of the university ought to have done the same.What say you, Master Guillaume Rym?Monseigneur, replied Guillaume Rym, let us be content with havingescaped half of the comedy. There is at least that much gained.Can these rascals continue their farce? asked the bailiff.Continue, continue, said the cardinal, it all the same to me. I’llread my breviary in the meantime.The bailiff advanced to the edge of the estrade, and cried, after havinginvoked silence by a wave of the hand,Bourgeois, rustics, and citizens, in order to satisfy those who wishthe play to begin again, and those who wish it to end, his eminenceorders that it be continued.Both parties were forced to resign themselves. But the public and theauthor long cherished a grudge against the cardinal.So the personages on the stage took up their parts, and Gringoire hopedthat the rest of his work, at least, would be listened to. This hope wasspeedily dispelled like his other illusions; silence had indeed,been restored in the audience, after a fashion; but Gringoire hadnot observed that at the moment when the cardinal gave the order tocontinue, the gallery was far from full, and that after the Flemishenvoys there had arrived new personages forming part of the cortege,whose names and ranks, shouted out in the midst of his dialogue by theintermittent cry of the usher, produced considerable ravages in it. Letthe reader imagine the effect in the midst of a theatrical piece, of theyelping of an usher, flinging in between two rhymes, and often in themiddle of a line, parentheses like the following,Master Jacques Charmolue, procurator to the king in the EcclesiasticalCourts!Jehan de Harlay, equerry guardian of the office of chevalier of thenight watch of the city of Paris!Messire Galiot de Genoilhac, chevalier, seigneur de Brussac, master ofthe king artillery!Master DreuxRaguier, surveyor of the woods and forests of the king oursovereign, in the land of France, Champagne and Brie!Messire Louis de Graville, chevalier, councillor, and chamberlain ofthe king, admiral of France, keeper of the Forest of Vincennes!Master Denis le Mercier, guardian of the house of the blind at Paris! etc., etc., etc.This was becoming unbearable.This strange accompaniment, which rendered it difficult to followthe piece, made Gringoire all the more indignant because he couldnot conceal from himself the fact that the interest was continuallyincreasing, and that all his work required was a chance of being heard.It was, in fact, difficult to imagine a more ingenious and moredramatic composition. The four personages of the prologue were bewailingthemselves in their mortal embarrassment, when Venus in person, (_veraincessa patuit dea_) presented herself to them, clad in a fine robebearing the heraldic device of the ship of the city of Paris. Shehad come herself to claim the dolphin promised to the most beautiful.Jupiter, whose thunder could be heard rumbling in the dressingroom,supported her claim, and Venus was on the point of carrying itoff,that is to say, without allegory, of marrying monsieur thedauphin, when a young child clad in white damask, and holding in herhand a daisy (a transparent personification of Mademoiselle Margueriteof Flanders) came to contest it with Venus.Theatrical effect and change.After a dispute, Venus, Marguerite, and the assistants agreed to submitto the good judgment of time holy Virgin. There was another good part,that of the king of Mesopotamia; but through so many interruptions,it was difficult to make out what end he served. All these persons hadascended by the ladder to the stage.But all was over; none of these beauties had been felt nor understood.On the entrance of the cardinal, one would have said that an invisiblemagic thread had suddenly drawn all glances from the marble table to thegallery, from the southern to the western extremity of the hall. Nothingcould disenchant the audience; all eyes remained fixed there, andthe newcomers and their accursed names, and their faces, and theircostumes, afforded a continual diversion. This was very distressing.With the exception of Gisquette and Liénarde, who turned round from timeto time when Gringoire plucked them by the sleeve; with the exception ofthe big, patient neighbor, no one listened, no one looked at the poor,deserted morality full face. Gringoire saw only profiles.With what bitterness did he behold his whole erection of glory and ofpoetry crumble away bit by bit! And to think that these people hadbeen upon the point of instituting a revolt against the bailiff throughimpatience to hear his work! now that they had it they did not care forit. This same representation which had been begun amid so unanimous anacclamation! Eternal flood and ebb of popular favor! To think that theyhad been on the point of hanging the bailiff sergeant! What would henot have given to be still at that hour of honey!But the usher brutal monologue came to an end; every one had arrived,and Gringoire breathed freely once more; the actors continued bravely.But Master Coppenole, the hosier, must needs rise of a sudden, andGringoire was forced to listen to him deliver, amid universal attention,the following abominable harangue.Messieurs the bourgeois and squires of Paris, I don’t know, cross ofGod! what we are doing here. I certainly do see yonder in the corner onthat stage, some people who appear to be fighting. I don’t know whetherthat is what you call a mystery, but it is not amusing; they quarrelwith their tongues and nothing more. I have been waiting for the firstblow this quarter of an hour; nothing comes; they are cowards who onlyscratch each other with insults. You ought to send for the fighters ofLondon or Rotterdam; and, I can tell you! you would have had blows ofthe fist that could be heard in the Place; but these men excite ourpity. They ought at least, to give us a moorish dance, or some othermummer! That is not what was told me; I was promised a feast of fools,with the election of a pope. We have our pope of fools at Ghent also;we’re not behindhand in that, cross of God! But this is the way wemanage it; we collect a crowd like this one here, then each person inturn passes his head through a hole, and makes a grimace at the rest;time one who makes the ugliest, is elected pope by general acclamation;that the way it is. It is very diverting. Would you like to make yourpope after the fashion of my country? At all events, it will be lesswearisome than to listen to chatterers. If they wish to come and maketheir grimaces through the hole, they can join the game. What say you,Messieurs les bourgeois? You have here enough grotesque specimens ofboth sexes, to allow of laughing in Flemish fashion, and there areenough of us ugly in countenance to hope for a fine grinning match.Gringoire would have liked to retort; stupefaction, rage, indignation,deprived him of words. Moreover, the suggestion of the popular hosierwas received with such enthusiasm by these bourgeois who were flatteredat being called squires, that all resistance was useless. There wasnothing to be done but to allow one self to drift with the torrent.Gringoire hid his face between his two hands, not being so fortunateas to have a mantle with which to veil his head, like Agamemnon ofTimantis.CHAPTER V. QUASIMODO.In the twinkling of an eye, all was ready to execute Coppenole idea.Bourgeois, scholars and law clerks all set to work. The little chapelsituated opposite the marble table was selected for the scene of thegrinning match. A pane broken in the pretty rose window above thedoor, left free a circle of stone through which it was agreed that thecompetitors should thrust their heads. In order to reach it, it was onlynecessary to mount upon a couple of hogsheads, which had been producedfrom I know not where, and perched one upon the other, after a fashion.It was settled that each candidate, man or woman (for it was possible tochoose a female pope), should, for the sake of leaving the impression ofhis grimace fresh and complete, cover his face and remain concealed inthe chapel until the moment of his appearance. In less than an instant,the chapel was crowded with competitors, upon whom the door was thenclosed.Coppenole, from his post, ordered all, directed all, arranged all.During the uproar, the cardinal, no less abashed than Gringoire, hadretired with all his suite, under the pretext of business and vespers,without the crowd which his arrival had so deeply stirred being in theleast moved by his departure. Guillaume Rym was the only one who noticedhis eminence discomfiture. The attention of the populace, like thesun, pursued its revolution; having set out from one end of the hall,and halted for a space in the middle, it had now reached the other end.The marble table, the brocaded gallery had each had their day; it wasnow the turn of the chapel of Louis XI. Henceforth, the field was opento all folly. There was no one there now, but the Flemings and therabble.The grimaces began. The first face which appeared at the aperture,with eyelids turned up to the reds, a mouth open like a maw, and abrow wrinkled like our hussar boots of the Empire, evoked such aninextinguishable peal of laughter that Homer would have taken all theselouts for gods. Nevertheless, the grand hall was anything but Olympus,and Gringoire poor Jupiter knew it better than any one else. A secondand third grimace followed, then another and another; and the laughterand transports of delight went on increasing. There was in thisspectacle, a peculiar power of intoxication and fascination, of which itwould be difficult to convey to the reader of our day and our salons anyidea.Let the reader picture to himself a series of visages presentingsuccessively all geometrical forms, from the triangle to the trapezium,from the cone to the polyhedron; all human expressions, from wrathto lewdness; all ages, from the wrinkles of the newborn babe to thewrinkles of the aged and dying; all religious phantasmagories, from Faunto Beelzebub; all animal profiles, from the maw to the beak, from thejowl to the muzzle. Let the reader imagine all these grotesque figuresof the Pont Neuf, those nightmares petrified beneath the hand of GermainPilon, assuming life and breath, and coming in turn to stare you in theface with burning eyes; all the masks of the Carnival of Venice passingin succession before your glass,in a word, a human kaleidoscope.The orgy grew more and more Flemish. Teniers could have given but a veryimperfect idea of it. Let the reader picture to himself in bacchanalform, Salvator Rosa battle. There were no longer either scholars orambassadors or bourgeois or men or women; there was no longer any ClopinTrouillefou, nor Gilles Lecornu, nor Marie Quatrelivres, nor RobinPoussepain. All was universal license. The grand hall was no longeranything but a vast furnace of effrontry and joviality, where everymouth was a cry, every individual a posture; everything shouted andhowled. The strange visages which came, in turn, to gnash their teethin the rose window, were like so many brands cast into the brazier;and from the whole of this effervescing crowd, there escaped, as from afurnace, a sharp, piercing, stinging noise, hissing like the wings of agnat.Ho hé! curse it!Just look at that face!It not good for anything.Guillemette Maugerepuis, just look at that bull muzzle; it only lacksthe horns. It can’t be your husband.Another!Belly of the pope! what sort of a grimace is that?Hola hé! that cheating. One must show only one face.That damned Perrette Callebotte! she capable of that!Good! Good!I’m stifling!There a fellow whose ears won’t go through! Etc., etc.But we must do justice to our friend Jehan. In the midst of thiswitches’ sabbath, he was still to be seen on the top of his pillar, likethe cabinboy on the topmast. He floundered about with incredible fury.His mouth was wide open, and from it there escaped a cry which no oneheard, not that it was covered by the general clamor, great as thatwas but because it attained, no doubt, the limit of perceptible sharpsounds, the thousand vibrations of Sauveur, or the eight thousand ofBiot.As for Gringoire, the first moment of depression having passed, hehad regained his composure. He had hardened himself againstadversity.Continue! he had said for the third time, to hiscomedians, speaking machines; then as he was marching with great stridesin front of the marble table, a fancy seized him to go and appear inhis turn at the aperture of the chapel, were it only for the pleasure ofmaking a grimace at that ungrateful populace.But no, that wouldnot be worthy of us; no, vengeance! let us combat until the end, herepeated to himself; the power of poetry over people is great; I willbring them back. We shall see which will carry the day, grimaces orpolite literature.Alas! he had been left the sole spectator of his piece. It was far worsethan it had been a little while before. He no longer beheld anything butbacks.I am mistaken. The big, patient man, whom he had already consulted in acritical moment, had remained with his face turned towards the stage. Asfor Gisquette and Liénarde, they had deserted him long ago.Gringoire was touched to the heart by the fidelity of his onlyspectator. He approached him and addressed him, shaking his armslightly; for the good man was leaning on the balustrade and dozing alittle.Monsieur, said Gringoire, I thank you!Monsieur, replied the big man with a yawn, for what?I see what wearies you, resumed the poet; tis all this noise whichprevents your hearing comfortably. But be at ease! your name shalldescend to posterity! Your name, if you please?Renauld Chateau, guardian of the seals of the Châtelet of Paris, atyour service.Monsieur, you are the only representative of the muses here, saidGringoire.You are too kind, sir, said the guardian of the seals at the Châtelet.You are the only one, resumed Gringoire, who has listened to thepiece decorously. What do you think of it?He! he! replied the fat magistrate, half aroused, it tolerablyjolly, that a fact.Gringoire was forced to content himself with this eulogy; for athunder of applause, mingled with a prodigious acclamation, cut theirconversation short. The Pope of the Fools had been elected.Noel! Noel! Noel! shouted the people on all sides. That was, infact, a marvellous grimace which was beaming at that moment through theaperture in the rose window. After all the pentagonal, hexagonal, andwhimsical faces, which had succeeded each other at that hole withoutrealizing the ideal of the grotesque which their imaginations, excitedby the orgy, had constructed, nothing less was needed to win theirsuffrages than the sublime grimace which had just dazzled the assembly.Master Coppenole himself applauded, and Clopin Trouillefou, who hadbeen among the competitors (and God knows what intensity of ugliness hisvisage could attain), confessed himself conquered: We will do the same.We shall not try to give the reader an idea of that tetrahedral nose,that horseshoe mouth; that little left eye obstructed with a red, bushy,bristling eyebrow, while the right eye disappeared entirely beneath anenormous wart; of those teeth in disarray, broken here and there, likethe embattled parapet of a fortress; of that callous lip, upon which oneof these teeth encroached, like the tusk of an elephant; of that forkedchin; and above all, of the expression spread over the whole; of thatmixture of malice, amazement, and sadness. Let the reader dream of thiswhole, if he can.    The ancient French hurrah.The acclamation was unanimous; people rushed towards the chapel. Theymade the lucky Pope of the Fools come forth in triumph. But it was thenthat surprise and admiration attained their highest pitch; the grimacewas his face.Or rather, his whole person was a grimace. A huge head, bristlingwith red hair; between his shoulders an enormous hump, a counterpartperceptible in front; a system of thighs and legs so strangely astraythat they could touch each other only at the knees, and, viewed fromthe front, resembled the crescents of two scythes joined by thehandles; large feet, monstrous hands; and, with all this deformity,an indescribable and redoubtable air of vigor, agility, andcourage,strange exception to the eternal rule which wills that forceas well as beauty shall be the result of harmony. Such was the pope whomthe fools had just chosen for themselves.One would have pronounced him a giant who had been broken and badly puttogether again.When this species of cyclops appeared on the threshold of the chapel,motionless, squat, and almost as broad as he was tall; squared on thebase, as a great man says; with his doublet half red, half violet, sownwith silver bells, and, above all, in the perfection of his ugliness,the populace recognized him on the instant, and shouted with onevoice,Tis Quasimodo, the bellringer! tis Quasimodo, the hunchback ofNotreDame! Quasimodo, the oneeyed! Quasimodo, the bandylegged! Noel!Noel!It will be seen that the poor fellow had a choice of surnames.Let the women with child beware! shouted the scholars.Or those who wish to be, resumed Joannes.The women did, in fact, hide their faces.Oh! the horrible monkey! said one of them.As wicked as he is ugly, retorted another.He the devil, added a third.I have the misfortune to live near NotreDame; I hear him prowlinground the eaves by night.With the cats.He always on our roofs.He throws spells down our chimneys.The other evening, he came and made a grimace at me through my atticwindow. I thought that it was a man. Such a fright as I had!I’m sure that he goes to the witches’ sabbath. Once he left a broom onmy leads.Oh! what a displeasing hunchback face!Oh! what an illfavored soul!Whew!The men, on the contrary, were delighted and applauded. Quasimodo, theobject of the tumult, still stood on the threshold of the chapel, sombreand grave, and allowed them to admire him.One scholar (Robin Poussepain, I think), came and laughed in his face,and too close. Quasimodo contented himself with taking him by thegirdle, and hurling him ten paces off amid the crowd; all withoututtering a word.Master Coppenole, in amazement, approached him.Cross of God! Holy Father! you possess the handsomest ugliness that Ihave ever beheld in my life. You would deserve to be pope at Rome, aswell as at Paris.So saying, he placed his hand gayly on his shoulder. Quasimodo did notstir. Coppenole went on,You are a rogue with whom I have a fancy for carousing, were it to costme a new dozen of twelve livres of Tours. How does it strike you?Quasimodo made no reply.Cross of God! said the hosier, are you deaf?He was, in truth, deaf.Nevertheless, he began to grow impatient with Coppenole behavior, andsuddenly turned towards him with so formidable a gnashing of teeth, thatthe Flemish giant recoiled, like a bulldog before a cat.Then there was created around that strange personage, a circle of terrorand respect, whose radius was at least fifteen geometrical feet. An oldwoman explained to Coppenole that Quasimodo was deaf.Deaf! said the hosier, with his great Flemish laugh. Cross of God!He a perfect pope!He! I recognize him, exclaimed Jehan, who had, at last, descended fromhis capital, in order to see Quasimodo at closer quarters, he thebellringer of my brother, the archdeacon. Goodday, Quasimodo!What a devil of a man! said Robin Poussepain still all bruisedwith his fall. He shows himself; he a hunchback. He walks; hebandylegged. He looks at you; he oneeyed. You speak to him; hedeaf. And what does this Polyphemus do with his tongue?He speaks when he chooses, said the old woman; he became deaf throughringing the bells. He is not dumb.That he lacks, remarks Jehan.And he has one eye too many, added Robin Poussepain.Not at all, said Jehan wisely. A oneeyed man is far less completethan a blind man. He knows what he lacks.In the meantime, all the beggars, all the lackeys, all the cutpurses,joined with the scholars, had gone in procession to seek, in thecupboard of the law clerks’ company, the cardboard tiara, and thederisive robe of the Pope of the Fools. Quasimodo allowed them to arrayhim in them without wincing, and with a sort of proud docility. Thenthey made him seat himself on a motley litter. Twelve officers of thefraternity of fools raised him on their shoulders; and a sort of bitterand disdainful joy lighted up the morose face of the cyclops, when hebeheld beneath his deformed feet all those heads of handsome, straight,wellmade men. Then the ragged and howling procession set out on itsmarch, according to custom, around the inner galleries of the Courts,before making the circuit of the streets and squares.CHAPTER VI. ESMERALDA.We are delighted to be able to inform the reader, that during the wholeof this scene, Gringoire and his piece had stood firm. His actors,spurred on by him, had not ceased to spout his comedy, and he had notceased to listen to it. He had made up his mind about the tumult, andwas determined to proceed to the end, not giving up the hope of a returnof attention on the part of the public. This gleam of hope acquiredfresh life, when he saw Quasimodo, Coppenole, and the deafening escortof the pope of the procession of fools quit the hall amid great uproar.The throng rushed eagerly after them. Good, he said to himself, therego all the mischiefmakers. Unfortunately, all the mischiefmakersconstituted the entire audience. In the twinkling of an eye, the grandhall was empty.To tell the truth, a few spectators still remained, some scattered,others in groups around the pillars, women, old men, or children,who had had enough of the uproar and tumult. Some scholars were stillperched astride of the windowsills, engaged in gazing into the Place.Well, thought Gringoire, here are still as many as are required tohear the end of my mystery. They are few in number, but it is a choiceaudience, a lettered audience.An instant later, a symphony which had been intended to produce thegreatest effect on the arrival of the Virgin, was lacking. Gringoireperceived that his music had been carried off by the procession of thePope of the Fools. Skip it, said he, stoically.He approached a group of bourgeois, who seemed to him to be discussinghis piece. This is the fragment of conversation which he caught,You know, Master Cheneteau, the Hôtel de Navarre, which belonged toMonsieur de Nemours?Yes, opposite the Chapelle de Braque.Well, the treasury has just let it to Guillaume Alixandre, historian,for six hivres, eight sols, parisian, a year.How rents are going up!Come, said Gringoire to himself, with a sigh, the others arelistening.Comrades, suddenly shouted one of the young scamps from the window,La Esmeralda! La Esmeralda in the Place!This word produced a magical effect. Every one who was left in the hallflew to the windows, climbing the walls in order to see, and repeating,La Esmeralda! La Esmeralda? At the same time, a great sound ofapplause was heard from without.What the meaning of this, of the Esmeralda? said Gringoire, wringinghis hands in despair. Ah, good heavens! it seems to be the turn of thewindows now.He returned towards the marble table, and saw that the representationhad been interrupted. It was precisely at the instant when Jupitershould have appeared with his thunder. But Jupiter was standingmotionless at the foot of the stage.Michel Giborne! cried the irritated poet, what are you doing there?Is that your part? Come up!Alas! said Jupiter, a scholar has just seized the ladder.Gringoire looked. It was but too true. All communication between hisplot and its solution was intercepted.The rascal, he murmured. And why did he take that ladder?In order to go and see the Esmeralda, replied Jupiter piteously. Hesaid, Come, here a ladder that of no use!’ and he took it.This was the last blow. Gringoire received it with resignation.May the devil fly away with you! he said to the comedian, and if Iget my pay, you shall receive yours.Then he beat a retreat, with drooping head, but the last in the field,like a general who has fought well.And as he descended the winding stairs of the courts: A fine rabble ofasses and dolts these Parisians! he muttered between his teeth; theycome to hear a mystery and don’t listen to it at all! They are engrossedby every one, by Chopin Trouillefou, by the cardinal, by Coppenole, byQuasimodo, by the devil! but by Madame the Virgin Mary, not at all. IfI had known, I’d have given you Virgin Mary; you ninnies! And I! tocome to see faces and behold only backs! to be a poet, and to reap thesuccess of an apothecary! It is true that Homerus begged through theGreek towns, and that Naso died in exile among the Muscovites. But maythe devil flay me if I understand what they mean with their Esmeralda!What is that word, in the first place?tis Egyptian!BOOK SECOND.CHAPTER I. FROM CHARYBDIS TO SCYLLA.Night comes on early in January. The streets were already dark whenGringoire issued forth from the Courts. This gloom pleased him; he wasin haste to reach some obscure and deserted alley, in order there tomeditate at his ease, and in order that the philosopher might place thefirst dressing upon the wound of the poet. Philosophy, moreover, was hissole refuge, for he did not know where he was to lodge for the night.After the brilliant failure of his first theatrical venture, hedared not return to the lodging which he occupied in the RueGreniersurl’Eau, opposite to the PortauFoin, having dependedupon receiving from monsieur the provost for his epithalamium, thewherewithal to pay Master Guillaume DoulxSire, farmer of the taxes onclovenfooted animals in Paris, the rent which he owed him, that isto say, twelve sols parisian; twelve times the value of all that hepossessed in the world, including his trunkhose, his shirt, and hiscap. After reflecting a moment, temporarily sheltered beneath the littlewicket of the prison of the treasurer of the SainteChappelle, as to theshelter which he would select for the night, having all the pavements ofParis to choose from, he remembered to have noticed the week previouslyin the Rue de la Savaterie, at the door of a councillor of theparliament, a stepping stone for mounting a mule, and to have said tohimself that that stone would furnish, on occasion, a very excellentpillow for a mendicant or a poet. He thanked Providence for having sentthis happy idea to him; but, as he was preparing to cross the Place,in order to reach the tortuous labyrinth of the city, where meanderall those old sister streets, the Rues de la Barillerie, de laVielleDraperie, de la Savaterie, de la Juiverie, etc., still extanttoday, with their ninestory houses, he saw the procession of the Popeof the Fools, which was also emerging from the court house, and rushingacross the courtyard, with great cries, a great flashing of torches, andthe music which belonged to him, Gringoire. This sight revived thepain of his selflove; he fled. In the bitterness of his dramaticmisadventure, everything which reminded him of the festival of that dayirritated his wound and made it bleed.58He was on the point of turning to the Pont SaintMichel; children wererunning about here and there with fire lances and rockets.Pest on firework candles! said Gringoire; and he fell back on the Pontau Change. To the house at the head of the bridge there had been affixedthree small banners, representing the king, the dauphin, and Margueriteof Flanders, and six little pennons on which were portrayed the Duke ofAustria, the Cardinal de Bourbon, M. de Beaujeu, and Madame Jeanne deFrance, and Monsieur the Bastard of Bourbon, and I know not whom else;all being illuminated with torches. The rabble were admiring.Happy painter, Jehan Fourbault! said Gringoire with a deep sigh;and he turned his back upon the bannerets and pennons. A street openedbefore him; he thought it so dark and deserted that he hoped to thereescape from all the rumors as well as from all the gleams of thefestival. At the end of a few moments his foot came in contact with anobstacle; he stumbled and fell. It was the May truss, which the clerksof the clerks’ law court had deposited that morning at the door ofa president of the parliament, in honor of the solemnity of the day.Gringoire bore this new disaster heroically; he picked himself up, andreached the water edge. After leaving behind him the civic Tournelleand the criminal tower, and skirted the great walls of the kinggarden, on that unpaved strand where the mud reached to his ankles, hereached the western point of the city, and considered for some timethe islet of the PasseurauxVaches, which has disappeared beneath thebronze horse of the Pont Neuf. The islet appeared to him in the shadowlike a black mass, beyond the narrow strip of whitish water whichseparated him from it. One could divine by the ray of a tiny light thesort of hut in the form of a beehive where the ferryman of cows tookrefuge at night.    A chamber of the ancient parliament of Paris.Happy ferryman! thought Gringoire; you do not dream of glory, andyou do not make marriage songs! What matters it to you, if kings andDuchesses of Burgundy marry? You know no other daisies (_marguerites_)than those which your April greensward gives your cows to browse upon;while I, a poet, am hooted, and shiver, and owe twelve sous, and thesoles of my shoes are so transparent, that they might serve as glassesfor your lantern! Thanks, ferryman, your cabin rests my eyes, and makesme forget Paris!He was roused from his almost lyric ecstacy, by a big double SaintJeancracker, which suddenly went off from the happy cabin. It was the cowferryman, who was taking his part in the rejoicings of the day, andletting off fireworks.This cracker made Gringoire skin bristle up all over.Accursed festival! he exclaimed, wilt thou pursue me everywhere? Oh!good God! even to the ferryman!Then he looked at the Seine at his feet, and a horrible temptation tookpossession of him:Oh! said he, I would gladly drown myself, were the water not socold!Then a desperate resolution occurred to him. It was, since he could notescape from the Pope of the Fools, from Jehan Fourbault bannerets,from May trusses, from squibs and crackers, to go to the Place de Grève.At least, he said to himself, I shall there have a firebrand of joywherewith to warm myself, and I can sup on some crumbs of the threegreat armorial bearings of royal sugar which have been erected on thepublic refreshmentstall of the city.CHAPTER II. THE PLACE DE GREVE.There remains today but a very imperceptible vestige of the Placede Grève, such as it existed then; it consists in the charming littleturret, which occupies the angle north of the Place, and which, alreadyenshrouded in the ignoble plaster which fills with paste the delicatelines of its sculpture, would soon have disappeared, perhaps submergedby that flood of new houses which so rapidly devours all the ancientfaçades of Paris.The persons who, like ourselves, never cross the Place de Grève withoutcasting a glance of pity and sympathy on that poor turret strangledbetween two hovels of the time of Louis XV., can easily reconstruct intheir minds the aggregate of edifices to which it belonged, and findagain entire in it the ancient Gothic place of the fifteenth century.It was then, as it is today, an irregular trapezoid, bordered on oneside by the quay, and on the other three by a series of lofty, narrow,and gloomy houses. By day, one could admire the variety of its edifices,all sculptured in stone or wood, and already presenting completespecimens of the different domestic architectures of the Middle Ages,running back from the fifteenth to the eleventh century, from thecasement which had begun to dethrone the arch, to the Roman semicircle,which had been supplanted by the ogive, and which still occupies, belowit, the first story of that ancient house de la Tour Roland, at thecorner of the Place upon the Seine, on the side of the street with theTannerie. At night, one could distinguish nothing of all that mass ofbuildings, except the black indentation of the roofs, unrollingtheir chain of acute angles round the place; for one of the radicaldifferences between the cities of that time, and the cities of thepresent day, lay in the façades which looked upon the places andstreets, and which were then gables. For the last two centuries thehouses have been turned round.In the centre of the eastern side of the Place, rose a heavy and hybridconstruction, formed of three buildings placed in juxtaposition. It wascalled by three names which explain its history, its destination, andits architecture: The House of the Dauphin, because Charles V., whenDauphin, had inhabited it; The Marchandise, because it had served astown hall; and The Pillared House (_domus ad piloria_), because ofa series of large pillars which sustained the three stories. The cityfound there all that is required for a city like Paris; a chapel inwhich to pray to God; a _plaidoyer_, or pleading room, in which to holdhearings, and to repel, at need, the King people; and under the roof,an _arsenac_ full of artillery. For the bourgeois of Paris were awarethat it is not sufficient to pray in every conjuncture, and to pleadfor the franchises of the city, and they had always in reserve, in thegarret of the town hall, a few good rusty arquebuses. The Grève had thenthat sinister aspect which it preserves today from the execrable ideaswhich it awakens, and from the sombre town hall of Dominique Bocador,which has replaced the Pillared House. It must be admitted that apermanent gibbet and a pillory, a justice and a ladder, as they werecalled in that day, erected side by side in the centre of the pavement,contributed not a little to cause eyes to be turned away from thatfatal place, where so many beings full of life and health have agonized;where, fifty years later, that fever of Saint Vallier was destined tohave its birth, that terror of the scaffold, the most monstrous of allmaladies because it comes not from God, but from man.It is a consoling idea (let us remark in passing), to think that thedeath penalty, which three hundred years ago still encumbered with itsiron wheels, its stone gibbets, and all its paraphernalia of torture,permanent and riveted to the pavement, the Grève, the Halles, the PlaceDauphine, the Cross du Trahoir, the Marché aux Pourceaux, that hideousMontfauçon, the barrier des Sergents, the Place aux Chats, the PorteSaintDenis, Champeaux, the Porte Baudets, the Porte Saint Jacques,without reckoning the innumerable ladders of the provosts, the bishop ofthe chapters, of the abbots, of the priors, who had the decree of lifeand death,without reckoning the judicial drownings in the river Seine;it is consoling today, after having lost successively all the pieces ofits armor, its luxury of torment, its penalty of imagination and fancy,its torture for which it reconstructed every five years a leather bedat the Grand Châtelet, that ancient suzerain of feudal society almostexpunged from our laws and our cities, hunted from code to code, chasedfrom place to place, has no longer, in our immense Paris, any more thana dishonored corner of the Grève,than a miserable guillotine, furtive,uneasy, shameful, which seems always afraid of being caught in the act,so quickly does it disappear after having dealt its blow.CHAPTER III. KISSES FOR BLOWS.When Pierre Gringoire arrived on the Place de Grève, he was paralyzed.He had directed his course across the Pont aux Meuniers, in orderto avoid the rabble on the Pont au Change, and the pennons of JehanFourbault; but the wheels of all the bishop mills had splashed him ashe passed, and his doublet was drenched; it seemed to him besides, thatthe failure of his piece had rendered him still more sensible to coldthan usual. Hence he made haste to draw near the bonfire, which wasburning magnificently in the middle of the Place. But a considerablecrowd formed a circle around it.Accursed Parisians! he said to himself (for Gringoire, like a truedramatic poet, was subject to monologues) there they are obstructing myfire! Nevertheless, I am greatly in need of a chimney corner; my shoesdrink in the water, and all those cursed mills wept upon me! That devilof a Bishop of Paris, with his mills! I’d just like to know what use abishop can make of a mill! Does he expect to become a miller instead ofa bishop? If only my malediction is needed for that, I bestow it uponhim! and his cathedral, and his mills! Just see if those boobies willput themselves out! Move aside! I’d like to know what they are doingthere! They are warming themselves, much pleasure may it give them! Theyare watching a hundred fagots burn; a fine spectacle!On looking more closely, he perceived that the circle was much largerthan was required simply for the purpose of getting warm at the kingfire, and that this concourse of people had not been attracted solely bythe beauty of the hundred fagots which were burning.In a vast space left free between the crowd and the fire, a young girlwas dancing.Whether this young girl was a human being, a fairy, or an angel, is whatGringoire, sceptical philosopher and ironical poet that he was, couldnot decide at the first moment, so fascinated was he by this dazzlingvision.She was not tall, though she seemed so, so boldly did her slender formdart about. She was swarthy of complexion, but one divined that, by day,her skin must possess that beautiful golden tone of the Andalusians andthe Roman women. Her little foot, too, was Andalusian, for it was bothpinched and at ease in its graceful shoe. She danced, she turned, shewhirled rapidly about on an old Persian rug, spread negligently underher feet; and each time that her radiant face passed before you, as shewhirled, her great black eyes darted a flash of lightning at you.All around her, all glances were riveted, all mouths open; and, in fact,when she danced thus, to the humming of the Basque tambourine, whichher two pure, rounded arms raised above her head, slender, frail andvivacious as a wasp, with her corsage of gold without a fold, hervariegated gown puffing out, her bare shoulders, her delicate limbs,which her petticoat revealed at times, her black hair, her eyes offlame, she was a supernatural creature.In truth, said Gringoire to himself, she is a salamander, she is anymph, she is a goddess, she is a bacchante of the Menelean Mount!At that moment, one of the salamander braids of hair becameunfastened, and a piece of yellow copper which was attached to it,rolled to the ground.Hé, no! said he, she is a gypsy!All illusions had disappeared.She began her dance once more; she took from the ground two swords,whose points she rested against her brow, and which she made to turnin one direction, while she turned in the other; it was a purely gypsyeffect. But, disenchanted though Gringoire was, the whole effect ofthis picture was not without its charm and its magic; the bonfireilluminated, with a red flaring light, which trembled, all alive, overthe circle of faces in the crowd, on the brow of the young girl, and atthe background of the Place cast a pallid reflection, on one side uponthe ancient, black, and wrinkled façade of the House of Pillars, on theother, upon the old stone gibbet.Among the thousands of visages which that light tinged with scarlet,there was one which seemed, even more than all the others, absorbed incontemplation of the dancer. It was the face of a man, austere, calm,and sombre. This man, whose costume was concealed by the crowd whichsurrounded him, did not appear to be more than five and thirty years ofage; nevertheless, he was bald; he had merely a few tufts of thin, grayhair on his temples; his broad, high forehead had begun to be furrowedwith wrinkles, but his deepset eyes sparkled with extraordinaryyouthfulness, an ardent life, a profound passion. He kept them fixedincessantly on the gypsy, and, while the giddy young girl of sixteendanced and whirled, for the pleasure of all, his revery seemed to becomemore and more sombre. From time to time, a smile and a sigh met upon hislips, but the smile was more melancholy than the sigh.The young girl, stopped at length, breathless, and the people applaudedher lovingly.Djali! said the gypsy.Then Gringoire saw come up to her, a pretty little white goat, alert,wideawake, glossy, with gilded horns, gilded hoofs, and gilded collar,which he had not hitherto perceived, and which had remained lying curledup on one corner of the carpet watching his mistress dance.Djali! said the dancer, it is your turn.And, seating herself, she gracefully presented her tambourine to thegoat.Djali, she continued, what month is this?The goat lifted its fore foot, and struck one blow upon the tambourine.It was the first month in the year, in fact.Djali, pursued the young girl, turning her tambourine round, what dayof the month is this?Djali raised his little gilt hoof, and struck six blows on thetambourine.Djali, pursued the Egyptian, with still another movement of thetambourine, what hour of the day is it?Djali struck seven blows. At that moment, the clock of the Pillar Houserang out seven.The people were amazed.There sorcery at the bottom of it, said a sinister voice in thecrowd. It was that of the bald man, who never removed his eyes from thegypsy.She shuddered and turned round; but applause broke forth and drowned themorose exclamation.It even effaced it so completely from her mind, that she continued toquestion her goat.Djali, what does Master Guichard GrandRemy, captain of the pistoliersof the town do, at the procession of Candlemas?Djali reared himself on his hind legs, and began to bleat, marchingalong with so much dainty gravity, that the entire circle of spectatorsburst into a laugh at this parody of the interested devoutness of thecaptain of pistoliers.Djali, resumed the young girl, emboldened by her growing success,how preaches Master Jacques Charmolue, procurator to the king in theecclesiastical court?The goat seated himself on his hind quarters, and began to bleat, wavinghis fore feet in so strange a manner, that, with the exception ofthe bad French, and worse Latin, Jacques Charmolue was therecomplete,gesture, accent, and attitude.And the crowd applauded louder than ever.Sacrilege! profanation! resumed the voice of the bald man.The gypsy turned round once more.Ah! said she, tis that villanous man! Then, thrusting her underlip out beyond the upper, she made a little pout, which appeared tobe familiar to her, executed a pirouette on her heel, and set aboutcollecting in her tambourine the gifts of the multitude.Big blanks, little blanks, targes and eagle liards showered into it.    A blank: an old French coin; six blanks were worth two sousand a half; targe, an ancient coin of Burgundy, a farthing.All at once, she passed in front of Gringoire. Gringoire put his hand sorecklessly into his pocket that she halted. The devil! said the poet,finding at the bottom of his pocket the reality, that is, to say, avoid. In the meantime, the pretty girl stood there, gazing at himwith her big eyes, and holding out her tambourine to him and waiting.Gringoire broke into a violent perspiration.If he had all Peru in his pocket, he would certainly have given it tothe dancer; but Gringoire had not Peru, and, moreover, America had notyet been discovered.Happily, an unexpected incident came to his rescue.Will you take yourself off, you Egyptian grasshopper? cried a sharpvoice, which proceeded from the darkest corner of the Place.The young girl turned round in affright. It was no longer the voice ofthe bald man; it was the voice of a woman, bigoted and malicious.However, this cry, which alarmed the gypsy, delighted a troop ofchildren who were prowling about there.It is the recluse of the TourRoland, they exclaimed, with wildlaughter, it is the sacked nun who is scolding! Hasn’t she supped?Let carry her the remains of the city refreshments!All rushed towards the Pillar House.In the meanwhile, Gringoire had taken advantage of the dancerembarrassment, to disappear. The children shouts had reminded him thathe, also, had not supped, so he ran to the public buffet. But the littlerascals had better legs than he; when he arrived, they had stripped thetable. There remained not so much as a miserable _camichon_ at five sousthe pound. Nothing remained upon the wall but slender fleursdelis,mingled with rose bushes, painted in 1434 by Mathieu Biterne. It was ameagre supper.It is an unpleasant thing to go to bed without supper, it is a stillless pleasant thing not to sup and not to know where one is to sleep.That was Gringoire condition. No supper, no shelter; he saw himselfpressed on all sides by necessity, and he found necessity very crabbed.He had long ago discovered the truth, that Jupiter created men during afit of misanthropy, and that during a wise man whole life, his destinyholds his philosophy in a state of siege. As for himself, he had neverseen the blockade so complete; he heard his stomach sounding a parley,and he considered it very much out of place that evil destiny shouldcapture his philosophy by famine.This melancholy revery was absorbing him more and more, when a song,quaint but full of sweetness, suddenly tore him from it. It was theyoung gypsy who was singing.Her voice was like her dancing, like her beauty. It was indefinableand charming; something pure and sonorous, aerial, winged, so to speak.There were continual outbursts, melodies, unexpected cadences, thensimple phrases strewn with aerial and hissing notes; then floods ofscales which would have put a nightingale to rout, but in which harmonywas always present; then soft modulations of octaves which rose andfell, like the bosom of the young singer. Her beautiful face followed,with singular mobility, all the caprices of her song, from the wildestinspiration to the chastest dignity. One would have pronounced her now amad creature, now a queen.The words which she sang were in a tongue unknown to Gringoire, andwhich seemed to him to be unknown to herself, so little relation didthe expression which she imparted to her song bear to the sense of thewords. Thus, these four lines, in her mouth, were madly gay, _Un cofre de gran riqueza  Hallaron dentro un pilar, Dentro del, nuevas banderas  Con figuras de espantar_.    A coffer of great richness  In a pillar heart they found,  Within it lay new banners,  With figures to astound.And an instant afterwards, at the accents which she imparted to thisstanza, _Alarabes de cavallo  Sin poderse menear, Con espadas, y los cuellos,  Ballestas de buen echar_,Gringoire felt the tears start to his eyes. Nevertheless, her songbreathed joy, most of all, and she seemed to sing like a bird, fromserenity and heedlessness.The gypsy song had disturbed Gringoire revery as the swan disturbsthe water. He listened in a sort of rapture, and forgetfulness ofeverything. It was the first moment in the course of many hours when hedid not feel that he suffered.The moment was brief.The same woman voice, which had interrupted the gypsy dance,interrupted her song.Will you hold your tongue, you cricket of hell? it cried, still fromthe same obscure corner of the place.The poor cricket stopped short. Gringoire covered up his ears.Oh! he exclaimed, accursed saw with missing teeth, which comes tobreak the lyre!Meanwhile, the other spectators murmured like himself; To the devilwith the sacked nun! said some of them. And the old invisible killjoymight have had occasion to repent of her aggressions against the gypsyhad their attention not been diverted at this moment by the processionof the Pope of the Fools, which, after having traversed many streets andsquares, debouched on the Place de Grève, with all its torches and allits uproar.This procession, which our readers have seen set out from the Palaisde Justice, had organized on the way, and had been recruited by allthe knaves, idle thieves, and unemployed vagabonds in Paris; so that itpresented a very respectable aspect when it arrived at the Grève.First came Egypt. The Duke of Egypt headed it, on horseback, with hiscounts on foot holding his bridle and stirrups for him; behind them, themale and female Egyptians, pellmell, with their little childrencrying on their shoulders; allduke, counts, and populacein rags andtatters. Then came the Kingdom of Argot; that is to say, all the thievesof France, arranged according to the order of their dignity; the minorpeople walking first. Thus defiled by fours, with the divers insignia oftheir grades, in that strange faculty, most of them lame, somecripples, others onearmed, shop clerks, pilgrim, _hubins_, bootblacks,thimbleriggers, street arabs, beggars, the bleareyed beggars, thieves,the weakly, vagabonds, merchants, sham soldiers, goldsmiths, passedmasters of pickpockets, isolated thieves. A catalogue that wouldweary Homer. In the centre of the conclave of the passed masters ofpickpockets, one had some difficulty in distinguishing the King ofArgot, the grand coësre, so called, crouching in a little cart drawnby two big dogs. After the kingdom of the Argotiers, came the Empire ofGalilee. Guillaume Rousseau, Emperor of the Empire of Galilee, marchedmajestically in his robe of purple, spotted with wine, preceded bybuffoons wrestling and executing military dances; surrounded by hismacebearers, his pickpockets and clerks of the chamber of accounts. Lastof all came the corporation of law clerks, with its maypoles crownedwith flowers, its black robes, its music worthy of the orgy, and itslarge candles of yellow wax. In the centre of this crowd, the grandofficers of the Brotherhood of Fools bore on their shoulders a littermore loaded down with candles than the reliquary of SainteGeneviève intime of pest; and on this litter shone resplendent, with crosier, cope,and mitre, the new Pope of the Fools, the bellringer of NotreDame,Quasimodo the hunchback.Each section of this grotesque procession had its own music. TheEgyptians made their drums and African tambourines resound. The slangmen, not a very musical race, still clung to the goat horn trumpet andthe Gothic rubebbe of the twelfth century. The Empire of Galilee was notmuch more advanced; among its music one could hardly distinguish somemiserable rebec, from the infancy of the art, still imprisoned in the_relami_. But it was around the Pope of the Fools that all the musicalriches of the epoch were displayed in a magnificent discord. It wasnothing but soprano rebecs, countertenor rebecs, and tenor rebecs,not to reckon the flutes and brass instruments. Alas! our readers willremember that this was Gringoire orchestra.It is difficult to convey an idea of the degree of proud and blissfulexpansion to which the sad and hideous visage of Quasimodo had attainedduring the transit from the Palais de Justice, to the Place de Grève. Itwas the first enjoyment of selflove that he had ever experienced. Downto that day, he had known only humiliation, disdain for his condition,disgust for his person. Hence, deaf though he was, he enjoyed, like averitable pope, the acclamations of that throng, which he hated becausehe felt that he was hated by it. What mattered it that his peopleconsisted of a pack of fools, cripples, thieves, and beggars? it wasstill a people and he was its sovereign. And he accepted seriously allthis ironical applause, all this derisive respect, with which the crowdmingled, it must be admitted, a good deal of very real fear. For thehunchback was robust; for the bandylegged fellow was agile; for thedeaf man was malicious: three qualities which temper ridicule.We are far from believing, however, that the new Pope of the Foolsunderstood both the sentiments which he felt and the sentiments whichhe inspired. The spirit which was lodged in this failure of a body had,necessarily, something incomplete and deaf about it. Thus, what he feltat the moment was to him, absolutely vague, indistinct, and confused.Only joy made itself felt, only pride dominated. Around that sombre andunhappy face, there hung a radiance.It was, then, not without surprise and alarm, that at the very momentwhen Quasimodo was passing the Pillar House, in that semiintoxicatedstate, a man was seen to dart from the crowd, and to tear from hishands, with a gesture of anger, his crosier of gilded wood, the emblemof his mock popeship.This man, this rash individual, was the man with the bald brow, who,a moment earlier, standing with the gypsy group had chilled thepoor girl with his words of menace and of hatred. He was dressed inan ecclesiastical costume. At the moment when he stood forth from thecrowd, Gringoire, who had not noticed him up to that time, recognizedhim: Hold! he said, with an exclamation of astonishment. Eh! tis mymaster in Hermes, Dom Claude Frollo, the archdeacon! What the devil doeshe want of that old oneeyed fellow? He’ll get himself devoured!A cry of terror arose, in fact. The formidable Quasimodo had hurledhimself from the litter, and the women turned aside their eyes in ordernot to see him tear the archdeacon asunder.He made one bound as far as the priest, looked at him, and fell upon hisknees.The priest tore off his tiara, broke his crozier, and rent his tinselcope.Quasimodo remained on his knees, with head bent and hands clasped.Then there was established between them a strange dialogue of signsand gestures, for neither of them spoke. The priest, erect on hisfeet, irritated, threatening, imperious; Quasimodo, prostrate, humble,suppliant. And, nevertheless, it is certain that Quasimodo could havecrushed the priest with his thumb.At length the archdeacon, giving Quasimodo powerful shoulder a roughshake, made him a sign to rise and follow him.Quasimodo rose.Then the Brotherhood of Fools, their first stupor having passed off,wished to defend their pope, so abruptly dethroned. The Egyptians, themen of slang, and all the fraternity of law clerks, gathered howlinground the priest.Quasimodo placed himself in front of the priest, set in play the musclesof his athletic fists, and glared upon the assailants with the snarl ofan angry tiger.The priest resumed his sombre gravity, made a sign to Quasimodo, andretired in silence.Quasimodo walked in front of him, scattering the crowd as he passed.When they had traversed the populace and the Place, the cloud of curiousand idle were minded to follow them. Quasimodo then constituted himselfthe rearguard, and followed the archdeacon, walking backwards, squat,surly, monstrous, bristling, gathering up his limbs, licking his boartusks, growling like a wild beast, and imparting to the crowd immensevibrations, with a look or a gesture.Both were allowed to plunge into a dark and narrow street, where noone dared to venture after them; so thoroughly did the mere chimera ofQuasimodo gnashing his teeth bar the entrance.Here a marvellous thing, said Gringoire; but where the deuce shallI find some supper?CHAPTER IV. THE INCONVENIENCES OF FOLLOWING A PRETTY WOMAN THROUGH THESTREETS IN THE EVENING.Gringoire set out to follow the gypsy at all hazards. He had seen her,accompanied by her goat, take to the Rue de la Coutellerie; he took theRue de la Coutellerie.Why not? he said to himself.Gringoire, a practical philosopher of the streets of Paris, had noticedthat nothing is more propitious to revery than following a prettywoman without knowing whither she is going. There was in this voluntaryabdication of his freewill, in this fancy submitting itself to anotherfancy, which suspects it not, a mixture of fantastic independence andblind obedience, something indescribable, intermediate between slaveryand liberty, which pleased Gringoire,a spirit essentially compound,undecided, and complex, holding the extremities of all extremes,incessantly suspended between all human propensities, and neutralizingone by the other. He was fond of comparing himself to Mahomet coffin,attracted in two different directions by two loadstones, and hesitatingeternally between the heights and the depths, between the vault and thepavement, between fall and ascent, between zenith and nadir.If Gringoire had lived in our day, what a fine middle course he wouldhold between classicism and romanticism!But he was not sufficiently primitive to live three hundred years,and tis a pity. His absence is a void which is but too sensibly felttoday.Moreover, for the purpose of thus following passersby (and especiallyfemale passersby) in the streets, which Gringoire was fond of doing,there is no better disposition than ignorance of where one is going tosleep.So he walked along, very thoughtfully, behind the young girl, whohastened her pace and made her goat trot as she saw the bourgeoisreturning home and the tavernsthe only shops which had been open thatdayclosing.After all, he half thought to himself, she must lodge somewhere;gypsies have kindly hearts. Who knows?And in the points of suspense which he placed after this reticence inhis mind, there lay I know not what flattering ideas.Meanwhile, from time to time, as he passed the last groups of bourgeoisclosing their doors, he caught some scraps of their conversation, whichbroke the thread of his pleasant hypotheses.Now it was two old men accosting each other.Do you know that it is cold, Master Thibaut Fernicle? (Gringoire hadbeen aware of this since the beginning of the winter.)Yes, indeed, Master Boniface Disome! Are we going to have a wintersuch as we had three years ago, in 80, when wood cost eight sous themeasure?Bah! that nothing, Master Thibaut, compared with the winter of 1407,when it froze from St. Martin Day until Candlemas! and so cold thatthe pen of the registrar of the parliament froze every three words, inthe Grand Chamber! which interrupted the registration of justice.Further on there were two female neighbors at their windows, holdingcandles, which the fog caused to sputter.Has your husband told you about the mishap, Mademoiselle la Boudraque?No. What is it, Mademoiselle Turquant?The horse of M. Gilles Godin, the notary at the Châtelet, took frightat the Flemings and their procession, and overturned Master PhilippeAvrillot, lay monk of the Célestins.Really?Actually.A bourgeois horse! tis rather too much! If it had been a cavalryhorse, well and good!And the windows were closed. But Gringoire had lost the thread of hisideas, nevertheless.Fortunately, he speedily found it again, and he knotted it togetherwithout difficulty, thanks to the gypsy, thanks to Djali, who stillwalked in front of him; two fine, delicate, and charming creatures,whose tiny feet, beautiful forms, and graceful manners he was engaged inadmiring, almost confusing them in his contemplation; believing themto be both young girls, from their intelligence and good friendship;regarding them both as goats,so far as the lightness, agility, anddexterity of their walk were concerned.But the streets were becoming blacker and more deserted every moment.The curfew had sounded long ago, and it was only at rare intervalsnow that they encountered a passerby in the street, or a light in thewindows. Gringoire had become involved, in his pursuit of the gypsy, inthat inextricable labyrinth of alleys, squares, and closed courtswhich surround the ancient sepulchre of the SaintsInnocents, and whichresembles a ball of thread tangled by a cat. Here are streets whichpossess but little logic! said Gringoire, lost in the thousands ofcircuits which returned upon themselves incessantly, but where the younggirl pursued a road which seemed familiar to her, without hesitation andwith a step which became ever more rapid. As for him, he would have beenutterly ignorant of his situation had he not espied, in passing, at theturn of a street, the octagonal mass of the pillory of the fish markets,the openwork summit of which threw its black, fretted outlines clearlyupon a window which was still lighted in the Rue Verdelet.The young girl attention had been attracted to him for the last fewmoments; she had repeatedly turned her head towards him with uneasiness;she had even once come to a standstill, and taking advantage of a ray oflight which escaped from a halfopen bakery to survey him intently, fromhead to foot, then, having cast this glance, Gringoire had seen her makethat little pout which he had already noticed, after which she passedon.This little pout had furnished Gringoire with food for thought. Therewas certainly both disdain and mockery in that graceful grimace. So hedropped his head, began to count the pavingstones, and to follow theyoung girl at a little greater distance, when, at the turn of a street,which had caused him to lose sight of her, he heard her utter a piercingcry.He hastened his steps.The street was full of shadows. Nevertheless, a twist of tow soaked inoil, which burned in a cage at the feet of the Holy Virgin at the streetcorner, permitted Gringoire to make out the gypsy struggling in the armsof two men, who were endeavoring to stifle her cries. The poor littlegoat, in great alarm, lowered his horns and bleated.Help! gentlemen of the watch! shouted Gringoire, and advanced bravely.One of the men who held the young girl turned towards him. It was theformidable visage of Quasimodo.Gringoire did not take to flight, but neither did he advance anotherstep.Quasimodo came up to him, tossed him four paces away on the pavementwith a backward turn of the hand, and plunged rapidly into the gloom,bearing the young girl folded across one arm like a silken scarf. Hiscompanion followed him, and the poor goat ran after them all, bleatingplaintively.Murder! murder! shrieked the unhappy gypsy.Halt, rascals, and yield me that wench! suddenly shouted in a voice ofthunder, a cavalier who appeared suddenly from a neighboring square.It was a captain of the king archers, armed from head to foot, withhis sword in his hand.He tore the gypsy from the arms of the dazed Quasimodo, threw her acrosshis saddle, and at the moment when the terrible hunchback, recoveringfrom his surprise, rushed upon him to regain his prey, fifteen orsixteen archers, who followed their captain closely, made theirappearance, with their twoedged swords in their fists. It was a squadof the king police, which was making the rounds, by order of MessireRobert d’Estouteville, guard of the provostship of Paris.Quasimodo was surrounded, seized, garroted; he roared, he foamed at themouth, he bit; and had it been broad daylight, there is no doubt thathis face alone, rendered more hideous by wrath, would have put theentire squad to flight. But by night he was deprived of his mostformidable weapon, his ugliness.His companion had disappeared during the struggle.The gypsy gracefully raised herself upright upon the officer saddle,placed both hands upon the young man shoulders, and gazed fixedly athim for several seconds, as though enchanted with his good looks andwith the aid which he had just rendered her. Then breaking silencefirst, she said to him, making her sweet voice still sweeter thanusual,What is your name, monsieur le gendarme?Captain Phoebus de Châteaupers, at your service, my beauty! repliedthe officer, drawing himself up.Thanks, said she.And while Captain Phoebus was turning up his moustache in Burgundianfashion, she slipped from the horse, like an arrow falling to earth, andfled.A flash of lightning would have vanished less quickly.Nombrill of the Pope! said the captain, causing Quasimodo straps tobe drawn tighter, I should have preferred to keep the wench.What would you have, captain? said one gendarme. The warbler hasfled, and the bat remains.CHAPTER V. RESULT OF THE DANGERS.Gringoire, thoroughly stunned by his fall, remained on the pavementin front of the Holy Virgin at the street corner. Little by little, heregained his senses; at first, for several minutes, he was floating in asort of halfsomnolent revery, which was not without its charm, in whichaeriel figures of the gypsy and her goat were coupled with Quasimodoheavy fist. This state lasted but a short time. A decidedly vividsensation of cold in the part of his body which was in contact with thepavement, suddenly aroused him and caused his spirit to return to thesurface.Whence comes this chill? he said abruptly, to himself. He thenperceived that he was lying half in the middle of the gutter.That devil of a hunchbacked cyclops! he muttered between his teeth;and he tried to rise. But he was too much dazed and bruised; he wasforced to remain where he was. Moreover, his hand was tolerably free; hestopped up his nose and resigned himself.The mud of Paris, he said to himselffor decidedly he thought that hewas sure that the gutter would prove his refuge for the night; and whatcan one do in a refuge, except dream?the mud of Paris is particularlystinking; it must contain a great deal of volatile and nitric salts.That, moreover, is the opinion of Master Nicholas Flamel, and of thealchemistsThe word alchemists suddenly suggested to his mind the idea ofArchdeacon Claude Frollo. He recalled the violent scene which he hadjust witnessed in part; that the gypsy was struggling with two men,that Quasimodo had a companion; and the morose and haughty face ofthe archdeacon passed confusedly through his memory. That would bestrange! he said to himself. And on that fact and that basis he beganto construct a fantastic edifice of hypothesis, that cardcastle ofphilosophers; then, suddenly returning once more to reality, Come! I’mfreezing! he ejaculated.The place was, in fact, becoming less and less tenable. Each moleculeof the gutter bore away a molecule of heat radiating from Gringoireloins, and the equilibrium between the temperature of his body and thetemperature of the brook, began to be established in rough fashion.Quite a different annoyance suddenly assailed him. A group of children,those little barefooted savages who have always roamed the pavementsof Paris under the eternal name of _gamins_, and who, when we were alsochildren ourselves, threw stones at all of us in the afternoon, when wecame out of school, because our trousers were not torna swarm of theseyoung scamps rushed towards the square where Gringoire lay, with shoutsand laughter which seemed to pay but little heed to the sleep of theneighbors. They were dragging after them some sort of hideous sack;and the noise of their wooden shoes alone would have roused the dead.Gringoire who was not quite dead yet, half raised himself.Ohé, Hennequin Dandéche! Ohè, Jehan Pincebourde! they shouted indeafening tones, old Eustache Moubon, the merchant at the corner, hasjust died. We’ve got his straw pallet, we’re going to have a bonfire outof it. It the turn of the Flemish today!And behold, they flung the pallet directly upon Gringoire, beside whomthey had arrived, without espying him. At the same time, one of themtook a handful of straw and set off to light it at the wick of the goodVirgin.S’death! growled Gringoire, am I going to be too warm now?It was a critical moment. He was caught between fire and water; he madea superhuman effort, the effort of a counterfeiter of money who is onthe point of being boiled, and who seeks to escape. He rose to his feet,flung aside the straw pallet upon the street urchins, and fled.Holy Virgin! shrieked the children; tis the merchant ghost!And they fled in their turn.The straw mattress remained master of the field. Belleforet, FatherLe Juge, and Corrozet affirm that it was picked up on the morrow, withgreat pomp, by the clergy of the quarter, and borne to the treasuryof the church of Saint Opportune, where the sacristan, even as late as1789, earned a tolerably handsome revenue out of the great miracle ofthe Statue of the Virgin at the corner of the Rue Mauconseil, whichhad, by its mere presence, on the memorable night between the sixth andseventh of January, 1482, exorcised the defunct Eustache Moubon, who,in order to play a trick on the devil, had at his death maliciouslyconcealed his soul in his straw pallet.CHAPTER VI. THE BROKEN JUG.After having run for some time at the top of his speed, without knowingwhither, knocking his head against many a street corner, leaping many agutter, traversing many an alley, many a court, many a square, seekingflight and passage through all the meanderings of the ancient passagesof the Halles, exploring in his panic terror what the fine Latin of themaps calls _tota via, cheminum et viaria_, our poet suddenly halted forlack of breath in the first place, and in the second, because he hadbeen collared, after a fashion, by a dilemma which had just occurred tohis mind. It strikes me, Master Pierre Gringoire, he said to himself,placing his finger to his brow, that you are running like a madman. Thelittle scamps are no less afraid of you than you are of them. It strikesme, I say, that you heard the clatter of their wooden shoes fleeingsouthward, while you were fleeing northward. Now, one of two things,either they have taken flight, and the pallet, which they must haveforgotten in their terror, is precisely that hospitable bed in searchof which you have been running ever since morning, and which madame theVirgin miraculously sends you, in order to recompense you for havingmade a morality in her honor, accompanied by triumphs and mummeries; orthe children have not taken flight, and in that case they have put thebrand to the pallet, and that is precisely the good fire which you needto cheer, dry, and warm you. In either case, good fire or good bed, thatstraw pallet is a gift from heaven. The blessed Virgin Marie who standsat the corner of the Rue Mauconseil, could only have made EustacheMoubon die for that express purpose; and it is folly on your part toflee thus zigzag, like a Picard before a Frenchman, leaving behind youwhat you seek before you; and you are a fool!Then he retraced his steps, and feeling his way and searching, with hisnose to the wind and his ears on the alert, he tried to find theblessed pallet again, but in vain. There was nothing to be found butintersections of houses, closed courts, and crossings of streets, inthe midst of which he hesitated and doubted incessantly, being moreperplexed and entangled in this medley of streets than he would havebeen even in the labyrinth of the Hôtel des Tournelles. At length helost patience, and exclaimed solemnly: Cursed be cross roads! tis thedevil who has made them in the shape of his pitchfork!This exclamation afforded him a little solace, and a sort of reddishreflection which he caught sight of at that moment, at the extremity ofa long and narrow lane, completed the elevation of his moral tone. Godbe praised! said he, There it is yonder! There is my pallet burning. And comparing himself to the pilot who suffers shipwreck by night,_Salve_, he added piously, _salve, maris stella_!Did he address this fragment of litany to the Holy Virgin, or to thepallet? We are utterly unable to say.He had taken but a few steps in the long street, which sloped downwards,was unpaved, and more and more muddy and steep, when he noticed a verysingular thing. It was not deserted; here and there along its extentcrawled certain vague and formless masses, all directing their coursetowards the light which flickered at the end of the street, like thoseheavy insects which drag along by night, from blade to blade of grass,towards the shepherd fire.Nothing renders one so adventurous as not being able to feel the placewhere one pocket is situated. Gringoire continued to advance, and hadsoon joined that one of the forms which dragged along most indolently,behind the others. On drawing near, he perceived that it was nothingelse than a wretched legless cripple in a bowl, who was hopping along onhis two hands like a wounded fieldspider which has but two legs left.At the moment when he passed close to this species of spider with ahuman countenance, it raised towards him a lamentable voice: _La buonamancia, signor! la buona mancia_!    Alms.Deuce take you, said Gringoire, and me with you, if I know what youmean!And he passed on.He overtook another of these itinerant masses, and examined it. It wasan impotent man, both halt and crippled, and halt and crippled to sucha degree that the complicated system of crutches and wooden legs whichsustained him, gave him the air of a mason scaffolding on the march.Gringoire, who liked noble and classical comparisons, compared him inthought to the living tripod of Vulcan.This living tripod saluted him as he passed, but stopping his hat on alevel with Gringoire chin, like a shaving dish, while he shouted inthe latter ears: _Senor cabellero, para comprar un pedaso de pan_!    Give me the means to buy a bit of bread, sir.It appears, said Gringoire, that this one can also talk; but tis arude language, and he is more fortunate than I if he understands it. Then, smiting his brow, in a sudden transition of ideas: By the way,what the deuce did they mean this morning with their Esmeralda?He was minded to augment his pace, but for the third time somethingbarred his way. This something or, rather, some one was a blind man, alittle blind fellow with a bearded, Jewish face, who, rowing away in thespace about him with a stick, and towed by a large dog, droned throughhis nose with a Hungarian accent: _Facitote caritatem_!Well, now, said Gringoire, here one at last who speaks a Christiantongue. I must have a very charitable aspect, since they ask alms ofme in the present lean condition of my purse. My friend, and he turnedtowards the blind man, I sold my last shirt last week; that is to say,since you understand only the language of Cicero: _Vendidi hebdomadenuper transita meam ultimam chemisan_.That said, he turned his back upon the blind man, and pursued his way.But the blind man began to increase his stride at the same time; and,behold! the cripple and the legless man, in his bowl, came up on theirside in great haste, and with great clamor of bowl and crutches, uponthe pavement. Then all three, jostling each other at poor Gringoireheels, began to sing their song to him,_Caritatem_! chanted the blind man._La buona mancia_! chanted the cripple in the bowl.And the lame man took up the musical phrase by repeating: _Un pedaso depan_!Gringoire stopped up his ears. Oh, tower of Babel! he exclaimed.He set out to run. The blind man ran! The lame man ran! The cripple inthe bowl ran!And then, in proportion as he plunged deeper into the street, cripplesin bowls, blind men and lame men, swarmed about him, and men with onearm, and with one eye, and the leprous with their sores, some emergingfrom little streets adjacent, some from the airholes of cellars,howling, bellowing, yelping, all limping and halting, all flingingthemselves towards the light, and humped up in the mire, like snailsafter a shower.Gringoire, still followed by his three persecutors, and not knowingvery well what was to become of him, marched along in terror among them,turning out for the lame, stepping over the cripples in bowls, with hisfeet imbedded in that anthill of lame men, like the English captain whogot caught in the quicksand of a swarm of crabs.The idea occurred to him of making an effort to retrace his steps. Butit was too late. This whole legion had closed in behind him, and histhree beggars held him fast. So he proceeded, impelled both by thisirresistible flood, by fear, and by a vertigo which converted all thisinto a sort of horrible dream.At last he reached the end of the street. It opened upon an immenseplace, where a thousand scattered lights flickered in the confused mistsof night. Gringoire flew thither, hoping to escape, by the swiftness ofhis legs, from the three infirm spectres who had clutched him._Onde vas, hombre_? (Where are you going, my man?) cried the cripple,flinging away his crutches, and running after him with the best legsthat ever traced a geometrical step upon the pavements of Paris.In the meantime the legless man, erect upon his feet, crowned Gringoirewith his heavy iron bowl, and the blind man glared in his face withflaming eyes!Where am I? said the terrified poet.In the Court of Miracles, replied a fourth spectre, who had accostedthem.Upon my soul, resumed Gringoire, I certainly do behold the blind whosee, and the lame who walk, but where is the Saviour?They replied by a burst of sinister laughter.The poor poet cast his eyes about him. It was, in truth, thatredoubtable Cour des Miracles, whither an honest man had neverpenetrated at such an hour; the magic circle where the officers of theChâtelet and the sergeants of the provostship, who ventured thither,disappeared in morsels; a city of thieves, a hideous wart on the face ofParis; a sewer, from which escaped every morning, and whither returnedevery night to crouch, that stream of vices, of mendicancy andvagabondage which always overflows in the streets of capitals; amonstrous hive, to which returned at nightfall, with their booty, allthe drones of the social order; a lying hospital where the bohemian, thedisfrocked monk, the ruined scholar, the ne’erdowells of all nations,Spaniards, Italians, Germans,of all religions, Jews, Christians,Mahometans, idolaters, covered with painted sores, beggars by day, weretransformed by night into brigands; an immense dressingroom, in a word,where, at that epoch, the actors of that eternal comedy, which theft,prostitution, and murder play upon the pavements of Paris, dressed andundressed.It was a vast place, irregular and badly paved, like all the squares ofParis at that date. Fires, around which swarmed strange groups, blazedhere and there. Every one was going, coming, and shouting. Shrilllaughter was to be heard, the wailing of children, the voices ofwomen. The hands and heads of this throng, black against the luminousbackground, outlined against it a thousand eccentric gestures. At times,upon the ground, where trembled the light of the fires, mingled withlarge, indefinite shadows, one could behold a dog passing, whichresembled a man, a man who resembled a dog. The limits of races andspecies seemed effaced in this city, as in a pandemonium. Men, women,beasts, age, sex, health, maladies, all seemed to be in common amongthese people; all went together, they mingled, confounded, superposed;each one there participated in all.The poor and flickering flames of the fire permitted Gringoire todistinguish, amid his trouble, all around the immense place, a hideousframe of ancient houses, whose wormeaten, shrivelled, stunted façades,each pierced with one or two lighted attic windows, seemed to him, inthe darkness, like enormous heads of old women, ranged in a circle,monstrous and crabbed, winking as they looked on at the Witches’Sabbath.It was like a new world, unknown, unheard of, misshapen, creeping,swarming, fantastic.Gringoire, more and more terrified, clutched by the three beggars as bythree pairs of tongs, dazed by a throng of other faces which frothed andyelped around him, unhappy Gringoire endeavored to summon his presenceof mind, in order to recall whether it was a Saturday. But his effortswere vain; the thread of his memory and of his thought was broken; and,doubting everything, wavering between what he saw and what he felt, heput to himself this unanswerable question,If I exist, does this exist? if this exists, do I exist?At that moment, a distinct cry arose in the buzzing throng whichsurrounded him, Let take him to the king! let take him to theking!Holy Virgin! murmured Gringoire, the king here must be a ram.To the king! to the king! repeated all voices.They dragged him off. Each vied with the other in laying his claws uponhim. But the three beggars did not loose their hold and tore him fromthe rest, howling, He belongs to us!The poet already sickly doublet yielded its last sigh in thisstruggle.While traversing the horrible place, his vertigo vanished. After takinga few steps, the sentiment of reality returned to him. He began tobecome accustomed to the atmosphere of the place. At the first momentthere had arisen from his poet head, or, simply and prosaically,from his empty stomach, a mist, a vapor, so to speak, which, spreadingbetween objects and himself, permitted him to catch a glimpse of themonly in the incoherent fog of nightmare,in those shadows of dreamswhich distort every outline, agglomerating objects into unwieldy groups,dilating things into chimeras, and men into phantoms. Little by little,this hallucination was succeeded by a less bewildered and exaggeratingview. Reality made its way to the light around him, struck his eyes,struck his feet, and demolished, bit by bit, all that frightful poetrywith which he had, at first, believed himself to be surrounded. He wasforced to perceive that he was not walking in the Styx, but in mud, thathe was elbowed not by demons, but by thieves; that it was not his soulwhich was in question, but his life (since he lacked that preciousconciliator, which places itself so effectually between the bandit andthe honest mana purse). In short, on examining the orgy more closely,and with more coolness, he fell from the witches’ sabbath to thedramshop.The Cour des Miracles was, in fact, merely a dramshop; but a briganddramshop, reddened quite as much with blood as with wine.The spectacle which presented itself to his eyes, when his ragged escortfinally deposited him at the end of his trip, was not fitted to bear himback to poetry, even to the poetry of hell. It was more than ever theprosaic and brutal reality of the tavern. Were we not in the fifteenthcentury, we would say that Gringoire had descended from Michael Angeloto Callot.Around a great fire which burned on a large, circular flagstone, theflames of which had heated redhot the legs of a tripod, which wasempty for the moment, some wormeaten tables were placed, here and there,haphazard, no lackey of a geometrical turn having deigned to adjusttheir parallelism, or to see to it that they did not make too unusualangles. Upon these tables gleamed several dripping pots of wine andbeer, and round these pots were grouped many bacchic visages, purplewith the fire and the wine. There was a man with a huge belly and ajovial face, noisily kissing a woman of the town, thickset and brawny.There was a sort of sham soldier, a naquois, as the slang expressionruns, who was whistling as he undid the bandages from his fictitiouswound, and removing the numbness from his sound and vigorous knee, whichhad been swathed since morning in a thousand ligatures. On the otherhand, there was a wretched fellow, preparing with celandine and beefblood, his leg of God, for the next day. Two tables further on, apalmer, with his pilgrim costume complete, was practising the lamentof the Holy Queen, not forgetting the drone and the nasal drawl. Furtheron, a young scamp was taking a lesson in epilepsy from an old pretender,who was instructing him in the art of foaming at the mouth, by chewing amorsel of soap. Beside him, a man with the dropsy was getting rid of hisswelling, and making four or five female thieves, who were disputingat the same table, over a child who had been stolen that evening, holdtheir noses. All circumstances which, two centuries later, seemed soridiculous to the court, as Sauval says, that they served as a pastimeto the king, and as an introduction to the royal ballet of Night,divided into four parts and danced on the theatre of the PetitBourbon. Never, adds an eye witness of 1653, have the sudden metamorphoses ofthe Court of Miracles been more happily presented. Benserade prepared usfor it by some very gallant verses.Loud laughter everywhere, and obscene songs. Each one held his owncourse, carping and swearing, without listening to his neighbor. Potsclinked, and quarrels sprang up at the shock of the pots, and the brokenpots made rents in the rags.A big dog, seated on his tail, gazed at the fire. Some children weremingled in this orgy. The stolen child wept and cried. Another, a bigboy four years of age, seated with legs dangling, upon a bench that wastoo high for him, before a table that reached to his chin, and utteringnot a word. A third, gravely spreading out upon the table with hisfinger, the melted tallow which dripped from a candle. Last of all, alittle fellow crouching in the mud, almost lost in a cauldron, whichhe was scraping with a tile, and from which he was evoking a sound thatwould have made Stradivarius swoon.Near the fire was a hogshead, and on the hogshead a beggar. This was theking on his throne.The three who had Gringoire in their clutches led him in front of thishogshead, and the entire bacchanal rout fell silent for a moment, withthe exception of the cauldron inhabited by the child.Gringoire dared neither breathe nor raise his eyes._Hombre, quita tu sombrero_! said one of the three knaves, in whosegrasp he was, and, before he had comprehended the meaning, the other hadsnatched his hata wretched headgear, it is true, but still good on asunny day or when there was but little rain. Gringoire sighed.Meanwhile the king addressed him, from the summit of his cask,Who is this rogue?Gringoire shuddered. That voice, although accentuated by menace,recalled to him another voice, which, that very morning, had dealt thedeathblow to his mystery, by drawling, nasally, in the midst of theaudience, Charity, please! He raised his head. It was indeed ClopinTrouillefou.Clopin Trouillefou, arrayed in his royal insignia, wore neither one ragmore nor one rag less. The sore upon his arm had already disappeared.He held in his hand one of those whips made of thongs of white leather,which police sergeants then used to repress the crowd, and which werecalled _boullayes_. On his head he wore a sort of headgear, bound roundand closed at the top. But it was difficult to make out whether it wasa child cap or a king crown, the two things bore so strong aresemblance to each other.Meanwhile Gringoire, without knowing why, had regained some hope, onrecognizing in the King of the Cour des Miracles his accursed mendicantof the Grand Hall.Master, stammered he; monseigneursirehow ought I to addressyou? he said at length, having reached the culminating point of hiscrescendo, and knowing neither how to mount higher, nor to descendagain.Monseigneur, his majesty, or comrade, call me what you please. But makehaste. What have you to say in your own defence?In your own defence? thought Gringoire, that displeases me. Heresumed, stuttering, I am he, who this morningBy the devil claws! interrupted Clopin, your name, knave, andnothing more. Listen. You are in the presence of three powerfulsovereigns: myself, Clopin Trouillefou, King of Thunes, successor to theGrand Coësre, supreme suzerain of the Realm of Argot; Mathias HunyadiSpicali, Duke of Egypt and of Bohemia, the old yellow fellow whomyou see yonder, with a dish clout round his head; Guillaume Rousseau,Emperor of Galilee, that fat fellow who is not listening to us butcaressing a wench. We are your judges. You have entered the Kingdom ofArgot, without being an _argotier_; you have violated the privileges ofour city. You must be punished unless you are a _capon_, a _francmitou_or a _rifodé_; that is to say, in the slang of honest folks,a thief, abeggar, or a vagabond. Are you anything of that sort? Justify yourself;announce your titles.Alas! said Gringoire, I have not that honor. I am the authorThat is sufficient, resumed Trouillefou, without permitting himto finish. You are going to be hanged. Tis a very simple matter,gentlemen and honest bourgeois! as you treat our people in your abode,so we treat you in ours! The law which you apply to vagabonds, vagabondsapply to you. Tis your fault if it is harsh. One really must beholdthe grimace of an honest man above the hempen collar now and then; thatrenders the thing honorable. Come, friend, divide your rags gayly amongthese damsels. I am going to have you hanged to amuse the vagabonds, andyou are to give them your purse to drink your health. If you have anymummery to go through with, there a very good God the Father in thatmortar yonder, in stone, which we stole from SaintPierre aux Boeufs.You have four minutes in which to fling your soul at his head.The harangue was formidable.Well said, upon my soul! Clopin Trouillefou preaches like the HolyFather the Pope! exclaimed the Emperor of Galilee, smashing his pot inorder to prop up his table.Messeigneurs, emperors, and kings, said Gringoire coolly (for I knownot how, firmness had returned to him, and he spoke with resolution),don’t think of such a thing; my name is Pierre Gringoire. I am thepoet whose morality was presented this morning in the grand hall of theCourts.Ah! so it was you, master! said Clopin. I was there, _xête Dieu_!Well! comrade, is that any reason, because you bored us to death thismorning, that you should not be hung this evening?I shall find difficulty in getting out of it, said Gringoire tohimself. Nevertheless, he made one more effort: I don’t see why poetsare not classed with vagabonds, said he. Vagabond, Aesopus certainlywas; Homerus was a beggar; Mercurius was a thiefClopin interrupted him: I believe that you are trying to blarney uswith your jargon. Zounds! let yourself be hung, and don’t kick up such arow over it!Pardon me, monseigneur, the King of Thunes, replied Gringoire,disputing the ground foot by foot. It is worth troubleOnemoment!Listen to meYou are not going to condemn me without havingheard meHis unlucky voice was, in fact, drowned in the uproar which rose aroundhim. The little boy scraped away at his cauldron with more spirit thanever; and, to crown all, an old woman had just placed on the tripod afryingpan of grease, which hissed away on the fire with a noise similarto the cry of a troop of children in pursuit of a masker.In the meantime, Clopin Trouillefou appeared to hold a momentaryconference with the Duke of Egypt, and the Emperor of Galilee, whowas completely drunk. Then he shouted shrilly: Silence! and, as thecauldron and the fryingpan did not heed him, and continued their duet,he jumped down from his hogshead, gave a kick to the boiler, whichrolled ten paces away bearing the child with it, a kick to thefryingpan, which upset in the fire with all its grease, and gravelyremounted his throne, without troubling himself about the stifledtears of the child, or the grumbling of the old woman, whose supper waswasting away in a fine white flame.Trouillefou made a sign, and the duke, the emperor, and the passedmasters of pickpockets, and the isolated robbers, came and rangedthemselves around him in a horseshoe, of which Gringoire, still roughlyheld by the body, formed the centre. It was a semicircle of rags,tatters, tinsel, pitchforks, axes, legs staggering with intoxication,huge, bare arms, faces sordid, dull, and stupid. In the midst of thisRound Table of beggary, Clopin Trouillefou,as the doge of this senate,as the king of this peerage, as the pope of this conclave,dominated;first by virtue of the height of his hogshead, and next by virtue ofan indescribable, haughty, fierce, and formidable air, which caused hiseyes to flash, and corrected in his savage profile the bestial type ofthe race of vagabonds. One would have pronounced him a boar amid a herdof swine.Listen, said he to Gringoire, fondling his misshapen chin with hishorny hand; I don’t see why you should not be hung. It is true thatit appears to be repugnant to you; and it is very natural, for youbourgeois are not accustomed to it. You form for yourselves a great ideaof the thing. After all, we don’t wish you any harm. Here is a meansof extricating yourself from your predicament for the moment. Will youbecome one of us?The reader can judge of the effect which this proposition produced uponGringoire, who beheld life slipping away from him, and who was beginningto lose his hold upon it. He clutched at it again with energy.Certainly I will, and right heartily, said he.Do you consent, resumed Clopin, to enroll yourself among the peopleof the knife?Of the knife, precisely, responded Gringoire.You recognize yourself as a member of the free bourgeoisie? added theKing of Thunes.    A hightoned sharper.Of the free bourgeoisie.Subject of the Kingdom of Argot?Of the Kingdom of Argot.    Thieves.A vagabond?A vagabond.In your soul?In my soul.I must call your attention to the fact, continued the king, that youwill be hung all the same.The devil! said the poet.Only, continued Clopin imperturbably, you will be hung later on, withmore ceremony, at the expense of the good city of Paris, on a handsomestone gibbet, and by honest men. That is a consolation.Just so, responded Gringoire.There are other advantages. In your quality of a hightoned sharper,you will not have to pay the taxes on mud, or the poor, or lanterns, towhich the bourgeois of Paris are subject.So be it, said the poet. I agree. I am a vagabond, a thief, asharper, a man of the knife, anything you please; and I am all thatalready, monsieur, King of Thunes, for I am a philosopher; _et omnia inphilosophia, omnes in philosopho continentur_,all things are containedin philosophy, all men in the philosopher, as you know.The King of Thunes scowled.What do you take me for, my friend? What Hungarian Jew patter are youjabbering at us? I don’t know Hebrew. One isn’t a Jew because one isa bandit. I don’t even steal any longer. I’m above that; I kill.Cutthroat, yes; cutpurse, no.Gringoire tried to slip in some excuse between these curt words, whichwrath rendered more and more jerky.I ask your pardon, monseigneur. It is not Hebrew; tis Latin.I tell you, resumed Clopin angrily, that I’m not a Jew, and that I’llhave you hung, belly of the synagogue, like that little shopkeeper ofJudea, who is by your side, and whom I entertain strong hopes of seeingnailed to a counter one of these days, like the counterfeit coin that heis!So saying, he pointed his finger at the little, bearded Hungarian Jewwho had accosted Gringoire with his _facitote caritatem_, and who,understanding no other language beheld with surprise the King ofThunes illhumor overflow upon him.At length Monsieur Clopin calmed down.So you will be a vagabond, you knave? he said to our poet.Of course, replied the poet.Willing is not all, said the surly Clopin; good will doesn’t put oneonion the more into the soup, and tis good for nothing except to goto Paradise with; now, Paradise and the thieves’ band are two differentthings. In order to be received among the thieves, you must prove thatyou are good for something, and for that purpose, you must search themanikin.   L’argot.I’ll search anything you like, said Gringoire.Clopin made a sign. Several thieves detached themselves from the circle,and returned a moment later. They brought two thick posts, terminatedat their lower extremities in spreading timber supports, which made themstand readily upon the ground; to the upper extremity of the two poststhey fitted a crossbeam, and the whole constituted a very prettyportable gibbet, which Gringoire had the satisfaction of beholding risebefore him, in a twinkling. Nothing was lacking, not even the rope,which swung gracefully over the crossbeam.What are they going to do? Gringoire asked himself with someuneasiness. A sound of bells, which he heard at that moment, put anend to his anxiety; it was a stuffed manikin, which the vagabonds weresuspending by the neck from the rope, a sort of scarecrow dressed inred, and so hung with mulebells and larger bells, that one might havetricked out thirty Castilian mules with them. These thousand tiny bellsquivered for some time with the vibration of the rope, then graduallydied away, and finally became silent when the manikin had been broughtinto a state of immobility by that law of the pendulum which hasdethroned the water clock and the hourglass. Then Clopin, pointing outto Gringoire a rickety old stool placed beneath the manikin,Climb upthere.Death of the devil! objected Gringoire; I shall break my neck. Yourstool limps like one of Martial distiches; it has one hexameter legand one pentameter leg.Climb! repeated Clopin.Gringoire mounted the stool, and succeeded, not without someoscillations of head and arms, in regaining his centre of gravity.Now, went on the King of Thunes, twist your right foot round yourleft leg, and rise on the tip of your left foot.Monseigneur, said Gringoire, so you absolutely insist on my breakingsome one of my limbs?Clopin tossed his head.Hark ye, my friend, you talk too much. Here the gist of the matterin two words: you are to rise on tiptoe, as I tell you; in that way youwill be able to reach the pocket of the manikin, you will rummage it,you will pull out the purse that is there,and if you do all thiswithout our hearing the sound of a bell, all is well: you shall be avagabond. All we shall then have to do, will be to thrash you soundlyfor the space of a week._VentreDieu_! I will be careful, said Gringoire. And suppose I domake the bells sound?Then you will be hanged. Do you understand?I don’t understand at all, replied Gringoire.Listen, once more. You are to search the manikin, and take away itspurse; if a single bell stirs during the operation, you will be hung. Doyou understand that?Good, said Gringoire; I understand that. And then?If you succeed in removing the purse without our hearing the bells, youare a vagabond, and you will be thrashed for eight consecutive days. Youunderstand now, no doubt?No, monseigneur; I no longer understand. Where is the advantage to me?hanged in one case, cudgelled in the other?And a vagabond, resumed Clopin, and a vagabond; is that nothing? Itis for your interest that we should beat you, in order to harden you toblows.Many thanks, replied the poet.Come, make haste, said the king, stamping upon his cask, whichresounded like a huge drum! Search the manikin, and let there be an endto this! I warn you for the last time, that if I hear a single bell, youwill take the place of the manikin.The band of thieves applauded Clopin words, and arranged themselvesin a circle round the gibbet, with a laugh so pitiless that Gringoireperceived that he amused them too much not to have everything to fearfrom them. No hope was left for him, accordingly, unless it were theslight chance of succeeding in the formidable operation which wasimposed upon him; he decided to risk it, but it was not without firsthaving addressed a fervent prayer to the manikin he was about toplunder, and who would have been easier to move to pity than thevagabonds. These myriad bells, with their little copper tongues, seemedto him like the mouths of so many asps, open and ready to sting and tohiss.Oh! he said, in a very low voice, is it possible that my life dependson the slightest vibration of the least of these bells? Oh! he added,with clasped hands, bells, do not ring, handbells do not clang,mulebells do not quiver!He made one more attempt upon Trouillefou.And if there should come a gust of wind?You will be hanged, replied the other, without hesitation.Perceiving that no respite, nor reprieve, nor subterfuge was possible,he bravely decided upon his course of action; he wound his right footround his left leg, raised himself on his left foot, and stretched outhis arm: but at the moment when his hand touched the manikin, his body,which was now supported upon one leg only, wavered on the stool whichhad but three; he made an involuntary effort to support himself by themanikin, lost his balance, and fell heavily to the ground, deafenedby the fatal vibration of the thousand bells of the manikin, which,yielding to the impulse imparted by his hand, described first a rotarymotion, and then swayed majestically between the two posts.Malediction! he cried as he fell, and remained as though dead, withhis face to the earth.Meanwhile, he heard the dreadful peal above his head, the diabolicallaughter of the vagabonds, and the voice of Trouillefou saying,Pick me up that knave, and hang him without ceremony. He rose. Theyhad already detached the manikin to make room for him.The thieves made him mount the stool, Clopin came to him, passed therope about his neck, and, tapping him on the shoulder,Adieu, my friend. You can’t escape now, even if you digested with thepope guts.The word Mercy! died away upon Gringoire lips. He cast his eyesabout him; but there was no hope: all were laughing.Bellevigne de l’Etoile, said the King of Thunes to an enormousvagabond, who stepped out from the ranks, climb upon the cross beam.Bellevigne de l’Etoile nimbly mounted the transverse beam, and inanother minute, Gringoire, on raising his eyes, beheld him, with terror,seated upon the beam above his head.Now, resumed Clopin Trouillefou, as soon as I clap my hands, you,Andry the Red, will fling the stool to the ground with a blow of yourknee; you, François ChantePrune, will cling to the feet of the rascal;and you, Bellevigne, will fling yourself on his shoulders; and all threeat once, do you hear?Gringoire shuddered.Are you ready? said Clopin Trouillefou to the three thieves, who heldthemselves in readiness to fall upon Gringoire. A moment of horriblesuspense ensued for the poor victim, during which Clopin tranquillythrust into the fire with the tip of his foot, some bits of vine shootswhich the flame had not caught. Are you ready? he repeated, and openedhis hands to clap. One second more and all would have been over.But he paused, as though struck by a sudden thought.One moment! said he; I forgot! It is our custom not to hang a manwithout inquiring whether there is any woman who wants him. Comrade,this is your last resource. You must wed either a female vagabond or thenoose.This law of the vagabonds, singular as it may strike the reader, remainstoday written out at length, in ancient English legislation. (See_Burington Observations_.)Gringoire breathed again. This was the second time that he hadreturned to life within an hour. So he did not dare to trust to it tooimplicitly.Holà! cried Clopin, mounted once more upon his cask, holà! women,females, is there among you, from the sorceress to her cat, a wench whowants this rascal? Holà, Colette la Charonne! Elisabeth Trouvain! SimoneJodouyne! Marie Piédebou! Thonne la Longue! Bérarde Fanouel!Michelle Genaille! Claude Rongeoreille! Mathurine Girorou!Holà!IsabeaulaThierrye! Come and see! A man for nothing! Who wants him?Gringoire, no doubt, was not very appetizing in this miserablecondition. The female vagabonds did not seem to be much affected by theproposition. The unhappy wretch heard them answer: No! no! hang him;there’ll be the more fun for us all!Nevertheless, three emerged from the throng and came to smell ofhim. The first was a big wench, with a square face. She examined thephilosopher deplorable doublet attentively. His garment was worn, andmore full of holes than a stove for roasting chestnuts. The girl made awry face. Old rag! she muttered, and addressing Gringoire, Let seeyour cloak! I have lost it, replied Gringoire. Your hat? They tookit away from me. Your shoes? They have hardly any soles left. Yourpurse? Alas! stammered Gringoire, I have not even a sou. Letthem hang you, then, and say Thank you!’ retorted the vagabond wench,turning her back on him.The second,old, black, wrinkled, hideous, with an ugliness conspicuouseven in the Cour des Miracles, trotted round Gringoire. He almosttrembled lest she should want him. But she mumbled between her teeth,He too thin, and went off.The third was a young girl, quite fresh, and not too ugly. Save me! said the poor fellow to her, in a low tone. She gazed at him for amoment with an air of pity, then dropped her eyes, made a plait in herpetticoat, and remained in indecision. He followed all these movementswith his eyes; it was the last gleam of hope. No, said the young girl,at length, no! Guillaume Longuejoue would beat me. She retreated intothe crowd.You are unlucky, comrade, said Clopin.Then rising to his feet, upon his hogshead. No one wants him, heexclaimed, imitating the accent of an auctioneer, to the great delightof all; no one wants him? once, twice, three times! and, turningtowards the gibbet with a sign of his hand, Gone!Bellevigne de l’Etoile, Andry the Red, François ChantePrune, stepped upto Gringoire.At that moment a cry arose among the thieves: La Esmeralda! LaEsmeralda!Gringoire shuddered, and turned towards the side whence the clamorproceeded.The crowd opened, and gave passage to a pure and dazzling form.It was the gypsy.La Esmeralda! said Gringoire, stupefied in the midst of his emotions,by the abrupt manner in which that magic word knotted together all hisreminiscences of the day.This rare creature seemed, even in the Cour des Miracles, to exerciseher sway of charm and beauty. The vagabonds, male and female, rangedthemselves gently along her path, and their brutal faces beamed beneathher glance.She approached the victim with her light step. Her pretty Djali followedher. Gringoire was more dead than alive. She examined him for a momentin silence.You are going to hang this man? she said gravely, to Clopin.Yes, sister, replied the King of Thunes, unless you will take him foryour husband.She made her pretty little pout with her under lip. I’ll take him, said she.Gringoire firmly believed that he had been in a dream ever sincemorning, and that this was the continuation of it.The change was, in fact, violent, though a gratifying one. They undidthe noose, and made the poet step down from the stool. His emotion wasso lively that he was obliged to sit down.The Duke of Egypt brought an earthenware crock, without uttering a word.The gypsy offered it to Gringoire: Fling it on the ground, said she.The crock broke into four pieces.Brother, then said the Duke of Egypt, laying his hands upon theirforeheads, she is your wife; sister, he is your husband for four years.Go.CHAPTER VII. A BRIDAL NIGHT.A few moments later our poet found himself in a tiny arched chamber,very cosy, very warm, seated at a table which appeared to ask nothingbetter than to make some loans from a larder hanging near by, havinga good bed in prospect, and alone with a pretty girl. The adventuresmacked of enchantment. He began seriously to take himself for apersonage in a fairy tale; he cast his eyes about him from time totime to time, as though to see if the chariot of fire, harnessed totwowinged chimeras, which alone could have so rapidly transported himfrom Tartarus to Paradise, were still there. At times, also, he fixedhis eyes obstinately upon the holes in his doublet, in order to clingto reality, and not lose the ground from under his feet completely. Hisreason, tossed about in imaginary space, now hung only by this thread.The young girl did not appear to pay any attention to him; she went andcame, displaced a stool, talked to her goat, and indulged in a poutnow and then. At last she came and seated herself near the table, andGringoire was able to scrutinize her at his ease.You have been a child, reader, and you would, perhaps, be very happy tobe one still. It is quite certain that you have not, more than once (andfor my part, I have passed whole days, the best employed of my life, atit) followed from thicket to thicket, by the side of running water, on asunny day, a beautiful green or blue dragonfly, breaking its flight inabrupt angles, and kissing the tips of all the branches. You recollectwith what amorous curiosity your thought and your gaze were rivetedupon this little whirlwind, hissing and humming with wings of purple andazure, in the midst of which floated an imperceptible body, veiled bythe very rapidity of its movement. The aerial being which was dimlyoutlined amid this quivering of wings, appeared to you chimerical,imaginary, impossible to touch, impossible to see. But when, at length,the dragonfly alighted on the tip of a reed, and, holding your breaththe while, you were able to examine the long, gauze wings, the longenamel robe, the two globes of crystal, what astonishment you felt, andwhat fear lest you should again behold the form disappear into a shade,and the creature into a chimera! Recall these impressions, and you willreadily appreciate what Gringoire felt on contemplating, beneath hervisible and palpable form, that Esmeralda of whom, up to that time,he had only caught a glimpse, amidst a whirlwind of dance, song, andtumult.Sinking deeper and deeper into his revery: So this, he said tohimself, following her vaguely with his eyes, is la Esmeralda! acelestial creature! a street dancer! so much, and so little! Twas shewho dealt the deathblow to my mystery this morning, tis she who savesmy life this evening! My evil genius! My good angel! A pretty woman,on my word! and who must needs love me madly to have taken me in thatfashion. By the way, said he, rising suddenly, with that sentimentof the true which formed the foundation of his character and hisphilosophy, I don’t know very well how it happens, but I am herhusband!With this idea in his head and in his eyes, he stepped up to the younggirl in a manner so military and so gallant that she drew back.What do you want of me? said she.Can you ask me, adorable Esmeralda? replied Gringoire, with sopassionate an accent that he was himself astonished at it on hearinghimself speak.The gypsy opened her great eyes. I don’t know what you mean.What! resumed Gringoire, growing warmer and warmer, and supposingthat, after all, he had to deal merely with a virtue of the Cour desMiracles; am I not thine, sweet friend, art thou not mine?And, quite ingenuously, he clasped her waist.The gypsy corsage slipped through his hands like the skin of an eel.She bounded from one end of the tiny room to the other, stooped down,and raised herself again, with a little poniard in her hand, beforeGringoire had even had time to see whence the poniard came; proud andangry, with swelling lips and inflated nostrils, her cheeks as red as anapi apple, and her eyes darting lightnings. At the same time, the whitegoat placed itself in front of her, and presented to Gringoire a hostilefront, bristling with two pretty horns, gilded and very sharp. All thistook place in the twinkling of an eye.    A small dessert apple, bright red on one side and   greenishwhite on the other.The dragonfly had turned into a wasp, and asked nothing better than tosting.Our philosopher was speechless, and turned his astonished eyes from thegoat to the young girl. Holy Virgin! he said at last, when surprisepermitted him to speak, here are two hearty dames!The gypsy broke the silence on her side.You must be a very bold knave!Pardon, mademoiselle, said Gringoire, with a smile. But why did youtake me for your husband?Should I have allowed you to be hanged?So, said the poet, somewhat disappointed in his amorous hopes. Youhad no other idea in marrying me than to save me from the gibbet?And what other idea did you suppose that I had?Gringoire bit his lips. Come, said he, I am not yet so triumphant inCupido, as I thought. But then, what was the good of breaking that poorjug?Meanwhile Esmeralda dagger and the goat horns were still upon thedefensive.Mademoiselle Esmeralda, said the poet, let us come to terms. I amnot a clerk of the court, and I shall not go to law with you forthus carrying a dagger in Paris, in the teeth of the ordinances andprohibitions of M. the Provost. Nevertheless, you are not ignorant ofthe fact that Noel Lescrivain was condemned, a week ago, to pay tenParisian sous, for having carried a cutlass. But this is no affair ofmine, and I will come to the point. I swear to you, upon my share ofParadise, not to approach you without your leave and permission, but dogive me some supper.The truth is, Gringoire was, like M. Despreaux, not very voluptuous. He did not belong to that chevalier and musketeer species, who takeyoung girls by assault. In the matter of love, as in all other affairs,he willingly assented to temporizing and adjusting terms; and a goodsupper, and an amiable têteatête appeared to him, especially whenhe was hungry, an excellent interlude between the prologue and thecatastrophe of a love adventure.The gypsy did not reply. She made her disdainful little grimace, drewup her head like a bird, then burst out laughing, and the tiny poniarddisappeared as it had come, without Gringoire being able to see wherethe wasp concealed its sting.A moment later, there stood upon the table a loaf of rye bread, a sliceof bacon, some wrinkled apples and a jug of beer. Gringoire began to eateagerly. One would have said, to hear the furious clashing of hisiron fork and his earthenware plate, that all his love had turned toappetite.The young girl seated opposite him, watched him in silence, visiblypreoccupied with another thought, at which she smiled from time to time,while her soft hand caressed the intelligent head of the goat, gentlypressed between her knees.A candle of yellow wax illuminated this scene of voracity and revery.Meanwhile, the first cravings of his stomach having been stilled,Gringoire felt some false shame at perceiving that nothing remained butone apple.You do not eat, Mademoiselle Esmeralda?She replied by a negative sign of the head, and her pensive glance fixeditself upon the vault of the ceiling.What the deuce is she thinking of? thought Gringoire, staring at whatshe was gazing at; tis impossible that it can be that stone dwarfcarved in the keystone of that arch, which thus absorbs her attention.What the deuce! I can bear the comparison!He raised his voice, Mademoiselle!She seemed not to hear him.He repeated, still more loudly, Mademoiselle Esmeralda!Trouble wasted. The young girl mind was elsewhere, and Gringoirevoice had not the power to recall it. Fortunately, the goat interfered.She began to pull her mistress gently by the sleeve.What dost thou want, Djali? said the gypsy, hastily, as thoughsuddenly awakened.She is hungry, said Gringoire, charmed to enter into conversation.Esmeralda began to crumble some bread, which Djali ate gracefully fromthe hollow of her hand.Moreover, Gringoire did not give her time to resume her revery. Hehazarded a delicate question.So you don’t want me for your husband?The young girl looked at him intently, and said, No.For your lover? went on Gringoire.She pouted, and replied, No.For your friend? pursued Gringoire.She gazed fixedly at him again, and said, after a momentary reflection,Perhaps.This perhaps, so dear to philosophers, emboldened Gringoire.Do you know what friendship is? he asked.Yes, replied the gypsy; it is to be brother and sister; two soulswhich touch without mingling, two fingers on one hand.And love? pursued Gringoire.Oh! love! said she, and her voice trembled, and her eye beamed. Thatis to be two and to be but one. A man and a woman mingled into oneangel. It is heaven.The street dancer had a beauty as she spoke thus, that struck Gringoiresingularly, and seemed to him in perfect keeping with the almostoriental exaltation of her words. Her pure, red lips half smiled;her serene and candid brow became troubled, at intervals, under herthoughts, like a mirror under the breath; and from beneath her long,drooping, black eyelashes, there escaped a sort of ineffable light,which gave to her profile that ideal serenity which Raphael found at themystic point of intersection of virginity, maternity, and divinity.Nevertheless, Gringoire continued,What must one be then, in order to please you?A man.And I said he, what, then, am I?A man has a hemlet on his head, a sword in his hand, and golden spurson his heels.Good, said Gringoire, without a horse, no man. Do you love any one?As a lover?Yes.She remained thoughtful for a moment, then said with a peculiarexpression: That I shall know soon.Why not this evening? resumed the poet tenderly. Why not me?She cast a grave glance upon him and said,I can never love a man who cannot protect me.Gringoire colored, and took the hint. It was evident that the young girlwas alluding to the slight assistance which he had rendered her in thecritical situation in which she had found herself two hours previously.This memory, effaced by his own adventures of the evening, now recurredto him. He smote his brow.By the way, mademoiselle, I ought to have begun there. Pardon myfoolish absence of mind. How did you contrive to escape from the clawsof Quasimodo?This question made the gypsy shudder.Oh! the horrible hunchback, said she, hiding her face in her hands.And she shuddered as though with violent cold.Horrible, in truth, said Gringoire, who clung to his idea; but howdid you manage to escape him?La Esmeralda smiled, sighed, and remained silent.Do you know why he followed you? began Gringoire again, seeking toreturn to his question by a circuitous route.I don’t know, said the young girl, and she added hastily, but youwere following me also, why were you following me?In good faith, responded Gringoire, I don’t know either.Silence ensued. Gringoire slashed the table with his knife. The younggirl smiled and seemed to be gazing through the wall at something. Allat once she began to sing in a barely articulate voice,  _Quando las pintadas aves,  Mudas estan, y la tierra_    When the gayplumaged birds grow weary, and the earthShe broke off abruptly, and began to caress Djali.That a pretty animal of yours, said Gringoire.She is my sister, she answered.Why are you called la Esmeralda?’ asked the poet.I do not know.But why?She drew from her bosom a sort of little oblong bag, suspended from herneck by a string of adrézarach beads. This bag exhaled a strong odor ofcamphor. It was covered with green silk, and bore in its centre a largepiece of green glass, in imitation of an emerald.Perhaps it is because of this, said she.Gringoire was on the point of taking the bag in his hand. She drew back.Don’t touch it! It is an amulet. You would injure the charm or thecharm would injure you.The poet curiosity was more and more aroused.Who gave it to you?She laid one finger on her mouth and concealed the amulet in her bosom.He tried a few more questions, but she hardly replied.What is the meaning of the words, la Esmeralda?’I don’t know, said she.To what language do they belong?They are Egyptian, I think.I suspected as much, said Gringoire, you are not a native of France?I don’t know.Are your parents alive?She began to sing, to an ancient air, _Mon père est oiseau, Ma mère est oiselle. Je passe l’eau sans nacelle, Je passe l’eau sans bateau, Ma mère est oiselle, Mon père est oiseau_.    My father is a bird, my mother is a bird. I cross thewater without a barque, I cross the water without a boat. My mother is abird, my father is a bird.Good, said Gringoire. At what age did you come to France?When I was very young.And when to Paris?Last year. At the moment when we were entering the papal gate I sawa reed warbler flit through the air, that was at the end of August; Isaid, it will be a hard winter.So it was, said Gringoire, delighted at this beginning of aconversation. I passed it in blowing my fingers. So you have the giftof prophecy?She retired into her laconics again.Is that man whom you call the Duke of Egypt, the chief of your tribe?Yes.But it was he who married us, remarked the poet timidly.She made her customary pretty grimace.I don’t even know your name.My name? If you want it, here it is,Pierre Gringoire.I know a prettier one, said she.Naughty girl! retorted the poet. Never mind, you shall not provokeme. Wait, perhaps you will love me more when you know me better; andthen, you have told me your story with so much confidence, that Iowe you a little of mine. You must know, then, that my name is PierreGringoire, and that I am a son of the farmer of the notary officeof Gonesse. My father was hung by the Burgundians, and my motherdisembowelled by the Picards, at the siege of Paris, twenty years ago.At six years of age, therefore, I was an orphan, without a sole tomy foot except the pavements of Paris. I do not know how I passed theinterval from six to sixteen. A fruit dealer gave me a plum here, abaker flung me a crust there; in the evening I got myself taken upby the watch, who threw me into prison, and there I found a bundle ofstraw. All this did not prevent my growing up and growing thin, as yousee. In the winter I warmed myself in the sun, under the porch of theHôtel de Sens, and I thought it very ridiculous that the fire on SaintJohn Day was reserved for the dog days. At sixteen, I wished to choosea calling. I tried all in succession. I became a soldier; but I was notbrave enough. I became a monk; but I was not sufficiently devout; andthen I’m a bad hand at drinking. In despair, I became an apprenticeof the woodcutters, but I was not strong enough; I had more of aninclination to become a schoolmaster; tis true that I did not know howto read, but that no reason. I perceived at the end of a certain time,that I lacked something in every direction; and seeing that I was goodfor nothing, of my own free will I became a poet and rhymester. Thatis a trade which one can always adopt when one is a vagabond, and itbetter than stealing, as some young brigands of my acquaintance advisedme to do. One day I met by luck, Dom Claude Frollo, the reverendarchdeacon of NotreDame. He took an interest in me, and it is to himthat I today owe it that I am a veritable man of letters, who knowsLatin from the _de Officiis_ of Cicero to the mortuology of theCelestine Fathers, and a barbarian neither in scholastics, nor inpolitics, nor in rhythmics, that sophism of sophisms. I am the authorof the Mystery which was presented today with great triumph and a greatconcourse of populace, in the grand hall of the Palais de Justice.I have also made a book which will contain six hundred pages, on thewonderful comet of 1465, which sent one man mad. I have enjoyed stillother successes. Being somewhat of an artillery carpenter, I lent a handto Jean Mangue great bombard, which burst, as you know, on the daywhen it was tested, on the Pont de Charenton, and killed four and twentycurious spectators. You see that I am not a bad match in marriage. Iknow a great many sorts of very engaging tricks, which I will teach yourgoat; for example, to mimic the Bishop of Paris, that cursed Phariseewhose mill wheels splash passersby the whole length of the Pont auxMeuniers. And then my mystery will bring me in a great deal of coinedmoney, if they will only pay me. And finally, I am at your orders, I andmy wits, and my science and my letters, ready to live with you, damsel,as it shall please you, chastely or joyously; husband and wife, if yousee fit; brother and sister, if you think that better.Gringoire ceased, awaiting the effect of his harangue on the young girl.Her eyes were fixed on the ground.Phoebus,’ she said in a low voice. Then, turning towards the poet,Phoebus’,what does that mean?Gringoire, without exactly understanding what the connection could bebetween his address and this question, was not sorry to display hiserudition. Assuming an air of importance, he replied,It is a Latin word which means sun.’Sun! she repeated.It is the name of a handsome archer, who was a god, added Gringoire.A god! repeated the gypsy, and there was something pensive andpassionate in her tone.At that moment, one of her bracelets became unfastened and fell.Gringoire stooped quickly to pick it up; when he straightened up, theyoung girl and the goat had disappeared. He heard the sound of a bolt.It was a little door, communicating, no doubt, with a neighboring cell,which was being fastened on the outside.Has she left me a bed, at least? said our philosopher.He made the tour of his cell. There was no piece of furniture adapted tosleeping purposes, except a tolerably long wooden coffer; and its coverwas carved, to boot; which afforded Gringoire, when he stretched himselfout upon it, a sensation somewhat similar to that which Micromégas wouldfeel if he were to lie down on the Alps.Come! said he, adjusting himself as well as possible, I must resignmyself. But here a strange nuptial night. Tis a pity. There wassomething innocent and antediluvian about that broken crock, which quitepleased me.BOOK THIRD.CHAPTER I. NOTREDAME.The church of NotreDame de Paris is still no doubt, a majestic andsublime edifice. But, beautiful as it has been preserved in growing old,it is difficult not to sigh, not to wax indignant, before the numberlessdegradations and mutilations which time and men have both caused thevenerable monument to suffer, without respect for Charlemagne, who laidits first stone, or for Philip Augustus, who laid the last.On the face of this aged queen of our cathedrals, by the side of awrinkle, one always finds a scar. _Tempus edax, homo edacior_; which Ishould be glad to translate thus: time is blind, man is stupid.    Time is a devourer; man, more so.If we had leisure to examine with the reader, one by one, the diversetraces of destruction imprinted upon the old church, time share wouldbe the least, the share of men the most, especially the men of art,since there have been individuals who assumed the title of architectsduring the last two centuries.And, in the first place, to cite only a few leading examples, therecertainly are few finer architectural pages than this façade, where,successively and at once, the three portals hollowed out in an arch; thebroidered and dentated cordon of the eight and twenty royal niches; theimmense central rose window, flanked by its two lateral windows, likea priest by his deacon and subdeacon; the frail and lofty gallery oftrefoil arcades, which supports a heavy platform above its fine, slendercolumns; and lastly, the two black and massive towers with their slatepenthouses, harmonious parts of a magnificent whole, superposed in fivegigantic stories;develop themselves before the eye, in a mass andwithout confusion, with their innumerable details of statuary, carving,and sculpture, joined powerfully to the tranquil grandeur of the whole;a vast symphony in stone, so to speak; the colossal work of one manand one people, all together one and complex, like the Iliads and theRomanceros, whose sister it is; prodigious product of the groupingtogether of all the forces of an epoch, where, upon each stone, one seesthe fancy of the workman disciplined by the genius of the artist startforth in a hundred fashions; a sort of human creation, in a word,powerful and fecund as the divine creation of which it seems to havestolen the double character,variety, eternity.And what we here say of the façade must be said of the entire church;and what we say of the cathedral church of Paris, must be said of allthe churches of Christendom in the Middle Ages. All things are in placein that art, selfcreated, logical, and well proportioned. To measurethe great toe of the foot is to measure the giant.Let us return to the façade of NotreDame, as it still appears to us,when we go piously to admire the grave and puissant cathedral, whichinspires terror, so its chronicles assert: _quæ mole sua terroremincutit spectantibus_.Three important things are today lacking in that façade: in the firstplace, the staircase of eleven steps which formerly raised it above thesoil; next, the lower series of statues which occupied the niches ofthe three portals; and lastly the upper series, of the twentyeight mostancient kings of France, which garnished the gallery of the first story,beginning with Childebert, and ending with Phillip Augustus, holding inhis hand the imperial apple.Time has caused the staircase to disappear, by raising the soil of thecity with a slow and irresistible progress; but, while thus causing theeleven steps which added to the majestic height of the edifice, tobe devoured, one by one, by the rising tide of the pavements ofParis,time has bestowed upon the church perhaps more than it has takenaway, for it is time which has spread over the façade that sombre hue ofthe centuries which makes the old age of monuments the period of theirbeauty.But who has thrown down the two rows of statues? who has left the nichesempty? who has cut, in the very middle of the central portal, that newand bastard arch? who has dared to frame therein that commonplace andheavy door of carved wood, à la Louis XV., beside the arabesques ofBiscornette? The men, the architects, the artists of our day.And if we enter the interior of the edifice, who has overthrown thatcolossus of Saint Christopher, proverbial for magnitude among statues,as the grand hall of the Palais de Justice was among halls, as the spireof Strasbourg among spires? And those myriads of statues, which peopledall the spaces between the columns of the nave and the choir, kneeling,standing, equestrian, men, women, children, kings, bishops, gendarmes,in stone, in marble, in gold, in silver, in copper, in wax even,whohas brutally swept them away? It is not time.And who substituted for the ancient gothic altar, splendidly encumberedwith shrines and reliquaries, that heavy marble sarcophagus, withangels’ heads and clouds, which seems a specimen pillaged fromthe ValdeGrâce or the Invalides? Who stupidly sealed that heavyanachronism of stone in the Carlovingian pavement of Hercandus? Was itnot Louis XIV., fulfilling the request of Louis XIII.?And who put the cold, white panes in the place of those windows, highin color, which caused the astonished eyes of our fathers to hesitatebetween the rose of the grand portal and the arches of the apse? Andwhat would a subchanter of the sixteenth century say, on beholdingthe beautiful yellow wash, with which our archiepiscopal vandals havedesmeared their cathedral? He would remember that it was the color withwhich the hangman smeared accursed edifices; he would recall theHôtel du PetitBourbon, all smeared thus, on account of the constabletreason. Yellow, after all, of so good a quality, said Sauval, and sowell recommended, that more than a century has not yet caused it to loseits color. He would think that the sacred place had become infamous,and would flee.And if we ascend the cathedral, without mentioning a thousand barbarismsof every sort,what has become of that charming little bell tower,which rested upon the point of intersection of the crossroofs,and which, no less frail and no less bold than its neighbor (alsodestroyed), the spire of the SainteChapelle, buried itself in the sky,farther forward than the towers, slender, pointed, sonorous, carvedin open work. An architect of good taste amputated it (1787), andconsidered it sufficient to mask the wound with that large, leadenplaster, which resembles a pot cover.Tis thus that the marvellous art of the Middle Ages has been treated innearly every country, especially in France. One can distinguish onits ruins three sorts of lesions, all three of which cut into it atdifferent depths; first, time, which has insensibly notched its surfacehere and there, and gnawed it everywhere; next, political and religiousrevolution, which, blind and wrathful by nature, have flung themselvestumultuously upon it, torn its rich garment of carving and sculpture,burst its rose windows, broken its necklace of arabesques and tinyfigures, torn out its statues, sometimes because of their mitres,sometimes because of their crowns; lastly, fashions, even more grotesqueand foolish, which, since the anarchical and splendid deviations ofthe Renaissance, have followed each other in the necessary decadenceof architecture. Fashions have wrought more harm than revolutions. Theyhave cut to the quick; they have attacked the very bone and framework ofart; they have cut, slashed, disorganized, killed the edifice, in formas in the symbol, in its consistency as well as in its beauty. Andthen they have made it over; a presumption of which neither time norrevolutions at least have been guilty. They have audaciously adjusted,in the name of good taste, upon the wounds of gothic architecture,their miserable gewgaws of a day, their ribbons of marble, their pomponsof metal, a veritable leprosy of eggshaped ornaments, volutes, whorls,draperies, garlands, fringes, stone flames, bronze clouds, pudgy cupids,chubbycheeked cherubim, which begin to devour the face of art in theoratory of Catherine de Medicis, and cause it to expire, two centurieslater, tortured and grimacing, in the boudoir of the Dubarry.Thus, to sum up the points which we have just indicated, three sorts ofravages today disfigure Gothic architecture. Wrinkles and warts on theepidermis; this is the work of time. Deeds of violence, brutalities,contusions, fractures; this is the work of the revolutions from Lutherto Mirabeau. Mutilations, amputations, dislocation of the joints,restorations; this is the Greek, Roman, and barbarian work ofprofessors according to Vitruvius and Vignole. This magnificent artproduced by the Vandals has been slain by the academies. The centuries,the revolutions, which at least devastate with impartiality andgrandeur, have been joined by a cloud of school architects, licensed,sworn, and bound by oath; defacing with the discernment and choice ofbad taste, substituting the _chicorées_ of Louis XV. for the Gothiclace, for the greater glory of the Parthenon. It is the kick of the assat the dying lion. It is the old oak crowning itself, and which, to heapthe measure full, is stung, bitten, and gnawed by caterpillars.How far it is from the epoch when Robert Cenalis, comparing NotreDamede Paris to the famous temple of Diana at Ephesus, so much laudedby the ancient pagans, which Erostatus has immortalized, foundthe Gallic temple more excellent in length, breadth, height, andstructure.    _Histoire Gallicane_, liv. II. Periode III. fo. 130, p. 1.NotreDame is not, moreover, what can be called a complete, definite,classified monument. It is no longer a Romanesque church; nor is it aGothic church. This edifice is not a type. NotreDame de Paris has not,like the Abbey of Tournus, the grave and massive frame, the largeand round vault, the glacial bareness, the majestic simplicity of theedifices which have the rounded arch for their progenitor. It is not,like the Cathedral of Bourges, the magnificent, light, multiform,tufted, bristling efflorescent product of the pointed arch. Impossibleto class it in that ancient family of sombre, mysterious churches, lowand crushed as it were by the round arch, almost Egyptian, with theexception of the ceiling; all hieroglyphics, all sacerdotal, allsymbolical, more loaded in their ornaments, with lozenges and zigzags,than with flowers, with flowers than with animals, with animals thanwith men; the work of the architect less than of the bishop; firsttransformation of art, all impressed with theocratic and militarydiscipline, taking root in the Lower Empire, and stopping with the timeof William the Conqueror. Impossible to place our Cathedral in thatother family of lofty, aerial churches, rich in painted windows andsculpture; pointed in form, bold in attitude; communal and bourgeois aspolitical symbols; free, capricious, lawless, as a work of art; secondtransformation of architecture, no longer hieroglyphic, immovable andsacerdotal, but artistic, progressive, and popular, which begins at thereturn from the crusades, and ends with Louis IX. NotreDame de Paris isnot of pure Romanesque, like the first; nor of pure Arabian race, likethe second.It is an edifice of the transition period. The Saxon architect completedthe erection of the first pillars of the nave, when the pointed arch,which dates from the Crusade, arrived and placed itself as a conquerorupon the large Romanesque capitals which should support only roundarches. The pointed arch, mistress since that time, constructed the restof the church. Nevertheless, timid and inexperienced at the start, itsweeps out, grows larger, restrains itself, and dares no longer dartupwards in spires and lancet windows, as it did later on, in so manymarvellous cathedrals. One would say that it were conscious of thevicinity of the heavy Romanesque pillars.However, these edifices of the transition from the Romanesque to theGothic, are no less precious for study than the pure types. They expressa shade of the art which would be lost without them. It is the graft ofthe pointed upon the round arch.NotreDame de Paris is, in particular, a curious specimen of thisvariety. Each face, each stone of the venerable monument, is a page notonly of the history of the country, but of the history of science andart as well. Thus, in order to indicate here only the principal details,while the little Red Door almost attains to the limits of the Gothicdelicacy of the fifteenth century, the pillars of the nave, by theirsize and weight, go back to the Carlovingian Abbey of SaintGermain desPrés. One would suppose that six centuries separated these pillars fromthat door. There is no one, not even the hermetics, who does not findin the symbols of the grand portal a satisfactory compendium of theirscience, of which the Church of SaintJacques de la Boucherie was socomplete a hieroglyph. Thus, the Roman abbey, the philosophers’ church,the Gothic art, Saxon art, the heavy, round pillar, which recallsGregory VII., the hermetic symbolism, with which Nicolas Flamel playedthe prelude to Luther, papal unity, schism, SaintGermain des Prés,SaintJacques de la Boucherie,all are mingled, combined, amalgamatedin NotreDame. This central mother church is, among the ancient churchesof Paris, a sort of chimera; it has the head of one, the limbs ofanother, the haunches of another, something of all.We repeat it, these hybrid constructions are not the least interestingfor the artist, for the antiquarian, for the historian. They makeone feel to what a degree architecture is a primitive thing, bydemonstrating (what is also demonstrated by the cyclopean vestiges,the pyramids of Egypt, the gigantic Hindoo pagodas) that the greatestproducts of architecture are less the works of individuals than ofsociety; rather the offspring of a nation effort, than the inspiredflash of a man of genius; the deposit left by a whole people; the heapsaccumulated by centuries; the residue of successive evaporations ofhuman society,in a word, species of formations. Each wave of timecontributes its alluvium, each race deposits its layer on the monument,each individual brings his stone. Thus do the beavers, thus do the bees,thus do men. The great symbol of architecture, Babel, is a hive.Great edifices, like great mountains, are the work of centuries. Artoften undergoes a transformation while they are pending, _pendent operainterrupta_; they proceed quietly in accordance with the transformedart. The new art takes the monument where it finds it, incrusts itselfthere, assimilates it to itself, develops it according to its fancy,and finishes it if it can. The thing is accomplished without trouble,without effort, without reaction,following a natural and tranquillaw. It is a graft which shoots up, a sap which circulates, a vegetationwhich starts forth anew. Certainly there is matter here for many largevolumes, and often the universal history of humanity in the successiveengrafting of many arts at many levels, upon the same monument. The man,the artist, the individual, is effaced in these great masses, whichlack the name of their author; human intelligence is there summed up andtotalized. Time is the architect, the nation is the builder.Not to consider here anything except the Christian architecture ofEurope, that younger sister of the great masonries of the Orient,it appears to the eyes as an immense formation divided into threewelldefined zones, which are superposed, the one upon the other: theRomanesque zone, the Gothic zone, the zone of the Renaissance, whichwe would gladly call the GrecoRoman zone. The Roman layer, which isthe most ancient and deepest, is occupied by the round arch, whichreappears, supported by the Greek column, in the modern and upper layerof the Renaissance. The pointed arch is found between the two. Theedifices which belong exclusively to any one of these three layersare perfectly distinct, uniform, and complete. There is the Abbey ofJumiéges, there is the Cathedral of Reims, there is the SainteCroix ofOrleans. But the three zones mingle and amalgamate along the edges, likethe colors in the solar spectrum. Hence, complex monuments, edificesof gradation and transition. One is Roman at the base, Gothic in themiddle, GrecoRoman at the top. It is because it was six hundred yearsin building. This variety is rare. The donjon keep of d’Etampes is aspecimen of it. But monuments of two formations are more frequent. Thereis NotreDame de Paris, a pointedarch edifice, which is imbedded byits pillars in that Roman zone, in which are plunged the portal ofSaintDenis, and the nave of SaintGermain des Prés. There is thecharming, halfGothic chapterhouse of Bocherville, where the Romanlayer extends half way up. There is the cathedral of Rouen, which wouldbe entirely Gothic if it did not bathe the tip of its central spire inthe zone of the Renaissance.    This is the same which is called, according to locality,climate, and races, Lombard, Saxon, or Byzantine. There are four sisterand parallel architectures, each having its special character, butderived from the same origin, the round arch. _Facies non omnibus una, No diversa tamen, qualem_, etc.Their faces not all alike, nor yet different, but such as the faces ofsisters ought to be.    This portion of the spire, which was of woodwork, is preciselythat which was consumed by lightning, in 1823.However, all these shades, all these differences, do not affect thesurfaces of edifices only. It is art which has changed its skin. Thevery constitution of the Christian church is not attacked by it. Thereis always the same internal woodwork, the same logical arrangementof parts. Whatever may be the carved and embroidered envelope of acathedral, one always finds beneath itin the state of a germ, and ofa rudiment at the leastthe Roman basilica. It is eternally developedupon the soil according to the same law. There are, invariably, twonaves, which intersect in a cross, and whose upper portion, rounded intoan apse, forms the choir; there are always the side aisles, for interiorprocessions, for chapels,a sort of lateral walks or promenades wherethe principal nave discharges itself through the spaces between thepillars. That settled, the number of chapels, doors, bell towers,and pinnacles are modified to infinity, according to the fancy of thecentury, the people, and art. The service of religion once assuredand provided for, architecture does what she pleases. Statues,stained glass, rose windows, arabesques, denticulations, capitals,basreliefs,she combines all these imaginings according to thearrangement which best suits her. Hence, the prodigious exterior varietyof these edifices, at whose foundation dwells so much order and unity.The trunk of a tree is immovable; the foliage is capricious.CHAPTER II. A BIRDEYE VIEW OF PARIS.We have just attempted to restore, for the reader benefit, thatadmirable church of NotreDame de Paris. We have briefly pointed outthe greater part of the beauties which it possessed in the fifteenthcentury, and which it lacks today; but we have omitted the principalthing,the view of Paris which was then to be obtained from the summitsof its towers.That was, in fact,when, after having long groped one way up the darkspiral which perpendicularly pierces the thick wall of the belfries,one emerged, at last abruptly, upon one of the lofty platforms inundatedwith light and air,that was, in fact, a fine picture which spreadout, on all sides at once, before the eye; a spectacle _sui generis_, ofwhich those of our readers who have had the good fortune to see aGothic city entire, complete, homogeneous,a few of which still remain,Nuremberg in Bavaria and Vittoria in Spain,can readily form an idea;or even smaller specimens, provided that they are well preserved,Vitréin Brittany, Nordhausen in Prussia.The Paris of three hundred and fifty years agothe Paris of thefifteenth centurywas already a gigantic city. We Parisians generallymake a mistake as to the ground which we think that we have gained,since Paris has not increased much over onethird since the time ofLouis XI. It has certainly lost more in beauty than it has gained insize.Paris had its birth, as the reader knows, in that old island of the Citywhich has the form of a cradle. The strand of that island was itsfirst boundary wall, the Seine its first moat. Paris remained for manycenturies in its island state, with two bridges, one on the north, theother on the south; and two bridge heads, which were at the same timeits gates and its fortresses,the GrandChâtelet on the right bank,the PetitChâtelet on the left. Then, from the date of the kings of thefirst race, Paris, being too cribbed and confined in its island, andunable to return thither, crossed the water. Then, beyond the Grand,beyond the PetitChâtelet, a first circle of walls and towers began toinfringe upon the country on the two sides of the Seine. Some vestigesof this ancient enclosure still remained in the last century; today,only the memory of it is left, and here and there a tradition, theBaudets or Baudoyer gate, Porte Bagauda.Little by little, the tide of houses, always thrust from the heart ofthe city outwards, overflows, devours, wears away, and effaces thiswall. Philip Augustus makes a new dike for it. He imprisons Paris in acircular chain of great towers, both lofty and solid. For the period ofmore than a century, the houses press upon each other, accumulate, andraise their level in this basin, like water in a reservoir. They beginto deepen; they pile story upon story; they mount upon each other; theygush forth at the top, like all laterally compressed growth, and thereis a rivalry as to which shall thrust its head above its neighbors, forthe sake of getting a little air. The street glows narrower and deeper,every space is overwhelmed and disappears. The houses finally leap thewall of Philip Augustus, and scatter joyfully over the plain, withoutorder, and all askew, like runaways. There they plant themselvessquarely, cut themselves gardens from the fields, and take theirease. Beginning with 1367, the city spreads to such an extent into thesuburbs, that a new wall becomes necessary, particularly on the rightbank; Charles V. builds it. But a city like Paris is perpetuallygrowing. It is only such cities that become capitals. They are funnels,into which all the geographical, political, moral, and intellectualwatersheds of a country, all the natural slopes of a people, pour;wells of civilization, so to speak, and also sewers, where commerce,industry, intelligence, population,all that is sap, all that is life,all that is the soul of a nation, filters and amasses unceasingly, dropby drop, century by century.So Charles V. wall suffered the fate of that of Philip Augustus. Atthe end of the fifteenth century, the Faubourg strides across it, passesbeyond it, and runs farther. In the sixteenth, it seems to retreatvisibly, and to bury itself deeper and deeper in the old city, so thickhad the new city already become outside of it. Thus, beginning with thefifteenth century, where our story finds us, Paris had already outgrownthe three concentric circles of walls which, from the time of Julian theApostate, existed, so to speak, in germ in the GrandChâtelet and thePetitChâtelet. The mighty city had cracked, in succession, its fourenclosures of walls, like a child grown too large for his garments oflast year. Under Louis XI., this sea of houses was seen to be piercedat intervals by several groups of ruined towers, from the ancient wall,like the summits of hills in an inundation,like archipelagos of theold Paris submerged beneath the new. Since that time Paris has undergoneyet another transformation, unfortunately for our eyes; but it haspassed only one more wall, that of Louis XV., that miserable wall ofmud and spittle, worthy of the king who built it, worthy of the poet whosung it, _Le mur murant Paris rend Paris murmurant_.    The wall walling Paris makes Paris murmur.In the fifteenth century, Paris was still divided into three whollydistinct and separate towns, each having its own physiognomy, its ownspecialty, its manners, customs, privileges, and history: the City, theUniversity, the Town. The City, which occupied the island, was themost ancient, the smallest, and the mother of the other two, crowded inbetween them like (may we be pardoned the comparison) a little old womanbetween two large and handsome maidens. The University covered the leftbank of the Seine, from the Tournelle to the Tour de Nesle, points whichcorrespond in the Paris of today, the one to the wine market, the otherto the mint. Its wall included a large part of that plain where Julianhad built his hot baths. The hill of SainteGeneviève was enclosed init. The culminating point of this sweep of walls was the Papal gate,that is to say, near the present site of the Pantheon. The Town, whichwas the largest of the three fragments of Paris, held the right bank.Its quay, broken or interrupted in many places, ran along the Seine,from the Tour de Billy to the Tour du Bois; that is to say, from theplace where the granary stands today, to the present site of theTuileries. These four points, where the Seine intersected the wall ofthe capital, the Tournelle and the Tour de Nesle on the right, the Tourde Billy and the Tour du Bois on the left, were called preeminently,the four towers of Paris. The Town encroached still more extensivelyupon the fields than the University. The culminating point of theTown wall (that of Charles V.) was at the gates of SaintDenis andSaintMartin, whose situation has not been changed.As we have just said, each of these three great divisions of Paris was atown, but too special a town to be complete, a city which could notget along without the other two. Hence three entirely distinct aspects:churches abounded in the City; palaces, in the Town; and colleges,in the University. Neglecting here the originalities, of secondaryimportance in old Paris, and the capricious regulations regarding thepublic highways, we will say, from a general point of view, taking onlymasses and the whole group, in this chaos of communal jurisdictions,that the island belonged to the bishop, the right bank to the provost ofthe merchants, the left bank to the Rector; over all ruled the provostof Paris, a royal not a municipal official. The City had NotreDame; theTown, the Louvre and the Hôtel de Ville; the University, the Sorbonne.The Town had the markets (Halles); the city, the Hospital; theUniversity, the PréauxClercs. Offences committed by the scholarson the left bank were tried in the law courts on the island, and werepunished on the right bank at Montfauçon; unless the rector, feeling theuniversity to be strong and the king weak, intervened; for it was thestudents’ privilege to be hanged on their own grounds.The greater part of these privileges, it may be noted in passing, andthere were some even better than the above, had been extorted from thekings by revolts and mutinies. It is the course of things from timeimmemorial; the king only lets go when the people tear away. There is anold charter which puts the matter naively: apropos of fidelity: _Civibusfidelitas in reges, quæ tamen aliquoties seditionibus interrypta, multapeperit privileyia_.In the fifteenth century, the Seine bathed five islands within the wallsof Paris: Louviers island, where there were then trees, and where thereis no longer anything but wood; l’ile aux Vaches, and l’ile NotreDame,both deserted, with the exception of one house, both fiefs of thebishopin the seventeenth century, a single island was formed out ofthese two, which was built upon and named l’ile SaintLouis, lastlythe City, and at its point, the little islet of the cow tender, whichwas afterwards engulfed beneath the platform of the PontNeuf. The Citythen had five bridges: three on the right, the Pont NotreDame, and thePont au Change, of stone, the Pont aux Meuniers, of wood; two on theleft, the Petit Pont, of stone, the Pont SaintMichel, of wood; allloaded with houses.The University had six gates, built by Philip Augustus; there were,beginning with la Tournelle, the Porte SaintVictor, the Porte Bordelle,the Porte Papale, the Porte SaintJacques, the Porte SaintMichel,the Porte SaintGermain. The Town had six gates, built by Charles V.;beginning with the Tour de Billy they were: the Porte SaintAntoine,the Porte du Temple, the Porte SaintMartin, the Porte SaintDenis, thePorte Montmartre, the Porte SaintHonoré. All these gates were strong,and also handsome, which does not detract from strength. A large, deepmoat, with a brisk current during the high water of winter, bathed thebase of the wall round Paris; the Seine furnished the water. At night,the gates were shut, the river was barred at both ends of the city withhuge iron chains, and Paris slept tranquilly.From a birdeye view, these three burgs, the City, the Town, andthe University, each presented to the eye an inextricable skein ofeccentrically tangled streets. Nevertheless, at first sight, onerecognized the fact that these three fragments formed but one body.One immediately perceived three long parallel streets, unbroken,undisturbed, traversing, almost in a straight line, all three cities,from one end to the other; from North to South, perpendicularly, to theSeine, which bound them together, mingled them, infused them in eachother, poured and transfused the people incessantly, from one to theother, and made one out of the three. The first of these streets ranfrom the Porte SaintMartin: it was called the Rue SaintJacques inthe University, Rue de la Juiverie in the City, Rue SaintMartin in theTown; it crossed the water twice, under the name of the Petit Pont andthe Pont NotreDame. The second, which was called the Rue de la Harpeon the left bank, Rue de la Barillerié in the island, Rue SaintDenison the right bank, Pont SaintMichel on one arm of the Seine, Pont auChange on the other, ran from the Porte SaintMichel in the University,to the Porte SaintDenis in the Town. However, under all these names,there were but two streets, parent streets, generating streets,the twoarteries of Paris. All the other veins of the triple city either derivedtheir supply from them or emptied into them.Independently of these two principal streets, piercing Parisdiametrically in its whole breadth, from side to side, common to theentire capital, the City and the University had also each its own greatspecial street, which ran lengthwise by them, parallel to the Seine,cutting, as it passed, at right angles, the two arterial thoroughfares.Thus, in the Town, one descended in a straight line from the PorteSaintAntoine to the Porte SaintHonoré; in the University fromthe Porte SaintVictor to the Porte SaintGermain. These two greatthoroughfares intersected by the two first, formed the canvas upon whichreposed, knotted and crowded together on every hand, the labyrinthinenetwork of the streets of Paris. In the incomprehensible plan ofthese streets, one distinguished likewise, on looking attentively, twoclusters of great streets, like magnified sheaves of grain, one in theUniversity, the other in the Town, which spread out gradually from thebridges to the gates.Some traces of this geometrical plan still exist today.Now, what aspect did this whole present, when, as viewed from the summitof the towers of NotreDame, in 1482? That we shall try to describe.For the spectator who arrived, panting, upon that pinnacle, it was firsta dazzling confusing view of roofs, chimneys, streets, bridges, places,spires, bell towers. Everything struck your eye at once: the carvedgable, the pointed roof, the turrets suspended at the angles of thewalls; the stone pyramids of the eleventh century, the slate obelisks ofthe fifteenth; the round, bare tower of the donjon keep; the square andfretted tower of the church; the great and the little, the massive andthe aerial. The eye was, for a long time, wholly lost in this labyrinth,where there was nothing which did not possess its originality, itsreason, its genius, its beauty,nothing which did not proceed from art;beginning with the smallest house, with its painted and carved front,with external beams, elliptical door, with projecting stories, to theroyal Louvre, which then had a colonnade of towers. But these are theprincipal masses which were then to be distinguished when the eye beganto accustom itself to this tumult of edifices.In the first place, the City.The island of the City, as Sauval says,who, in spite of his confused medley, sometimes has such happy turns ofexpression,the island of the city is made like a great ship, stuck inthe mud and run aground in the current, near the centre of the Seine.We have just explained that, in the fifteenth century, this ship wasanchored to the two banks of the river by five bridges. This form of aship had also struck the heraldic scribes; for it is from that, andnot from the siege by the Normans, that the ship which blazons the oldshield of Paris, comes, according to Favyn and Pasquier. For himwho understands how to decipher them, armorial bearings are algebra,armorial bearings have a tongue. The whole history of the second half ofthe Middle Ages is written in armorial bearings,the first half isin the symbolism of the Roman churches. They are the hieroglyphics offeudalism, succeeding those of theocracy.Thus the City first presented itself to the eye, with its stern to theeast, and its prow to the west. Turning towards the prow, one had beforeone an innumerable flock of ancient roofs, over which arched broadly theleadcovered apse of the SainteChapelle, like an elephant haunchesloaded with its tower. Only here, this tower was the most audacious, themost open, the most ornamented spire of cabinetmaker work that everlet the sky peep through its cone of lace. In front of NotreDame, andvery near at hand, three streets opened into the cathedral square,afine square, lined with ancient houses. Over the south side of thisplace bent the wrinkled and sullen façade of the Hôtel Dieu, and itsroof, which seemed covered with warts and pustules. Then, on the rightand the left, to east and west, within that wall of the City, which wasyet so contracted, rose the bell towers of its one and twenty churches,of every date, of every form, of every size, from the low and wormeatenbelfry of SaintDenis du Pas (_Carcer Glaueini_) to the slender needlesof SaintPierre aux Boeufs and SaintLandry.Behind NotreDame, the cloister and its Gothic galleries spread outtowards the north; on the south, the halfRoman palace of the bishop; onthe east, the desert point of the Terrain. In this throng of houses theeye also distinguished, by the lofty openwork mitres of stone whichthen crowned the roof itself, even the most elevated windows of thepalace, the Hôtel given by the city, under Charles VI., to Juvénaldes Ursins; a little farther on, the pitchcovered sheds of the PalusMarket; in still another quarter the new apse of SaintGermain le Vieux,lengthened in 1458, with a bit of the Rue aux Febves; and then, inplaces, a square crowded with people; a pillory, erected at the cornerof a street; a fine fragment of the pavement of Philip Augustus, amagnificent flagging, grooved for the horses’ feet, in the middle of theroad, and so badly replaced in the sixteenth century by the miserablecobblestones, called the pavement of the League; a deserted backcourtyard, with one of those diaphanous staircase turrets, such as wereerected in the fifteenth century, one of which is still to be seen inthe Rue des Bourdonnais. Lastly, at the right of the SainteChapelle,towards the west, the Palais de Justice rested its group of towers atthe edge of the water. The thickets of the king gardens, which coveredthe western point of the City, masked the Island du Passeur. As for thewater, from the summit of the towers of NotreDame one hardly saw it, oneither side of the City; the Seine was hidden by bridges, the bridges byhouses.And when the glance passed these bridges, whose roofs were visiblygreen, rendered mouldy before their time by the vapors from the water,if it was directed to the left, towards the University, the firstedifice which struck it was a large, low sheaf of towers, thePetitChàtelet, whose yawning gate devoured the end of the PetitPont.Then, if your view ran along the bank, from east to west, from theTournelle to the Tour de Nesle, there was a long cordon of houses, withcarved beams, stainedglass windows, each story projecting over thatbeneath it, an interminable zigzag of bourgeois gables, frequentlyinterrupted by the mouth of a street, and from time to time also by thefront or angle of a huge stone mansion, planted at its ease, with courtsand gardens, wings and detached buildings, amid this populace of crowdedand narrow houses, like a grand gentleman among a throng of rustics.There were five or six of these mansions on the quay, from the house ofLorraine, which shared with the Bernardins the grand enclosure adjoiningthe Tournelle, to the Hôtel de Nesle, whose principal tower ended Paris,and whose pointed roofs were in a position, during three months of theyear, to encroach, with their black triangles, upon the scarlet disk ofthe setting sun.This side of the Seine was, however, the least mercantile of the two.Students furnished more of a crowd and more noise there than artisans,and there was not, properly speaking, any quay, except from the PontSaintMichel to the Tour de Nesle. The rest of the bank of the Seine wasnow a naked strand, the same as beyond the Bernardins; again, a throngof houses, standing with their feet in the water, as between the twobridges.There was a great uproar of laundresses; they screamed, and talked, andsang from morning till night along the beach, and beat a great deal oflinen there, just as in our day. This is not the least of the gayetiesof Paris.The University presented a dense mass to the eye. From one end tothe other, it was homogeneous and compact. The thousand roofs, dense,angular, clinging to each other, composed, nearly all, of the samegeometrical element, offered, when viewed from above, the aspect of acrystallization of the same substance.The capricious ravine of streets did not cut this block of houses intotoo disproportionate slices. The fortytwo colleges were scattered aboutin a fairly equal manner, and there were some everywhere. The amusinglyvaried crests of these beautiful edifices were the product of the sameart as the simple roofs which they overshot, and were, actually, only amultiplication of the square or the cube of the same geometricalfigure. Hence they complicated the whole effect, without disturbingit; completed, without overloading it. Geometry is harmony. Somefine mansions here and there made magnificent outlines against thepicturesque attics of the left bank. The house of Nevers, the house ofRome, the house of Reims, which have disappeared; the Hôtel de Cluny,which still exists, for the consolation of the artist, and whose towerwas so stupidly deprived of its crown a few years ago. Close to Cluny,that Roman palace, with fine round arches, were once the hot baths ofJulian. There were a great many abbeys, of a beauty more devout, of agrandeur more solemn than the mansions, but not less beautiful, not lessgrand. Those which first caught the eye were the Bernardins, with theirthree bell towers; SainteGeneviève, whose square tower, which stillexists, makes us regret the rest; the Sorbonne, half college, halfmonastery, of which so admirable a nave survives; the fine quadrilateralcloister of the Mathurins; its neighbor, the cloister of SaintBenoit,within whose walls they have had time to cobble up a theatre, betweenthe seventh and eighth editions of this book; the Cordeliers, with theirthree enormous adjacent gables; the Augustins, whose graceful spireformed, after the Tour de Nesle, the second denticulation on this sideof Paris, starting from the west. The colleges, which are, in fact, theintermediate ring between the cloister and the world, hold the middleposition in the monumental series between the Hôtels and the abbeys,with a severity full of elegance, sculpture less giddy than the palaces,an architecture less severe than the convents. Unfortunately, hardlyanything remains of these monuments, where Gothic art combined withso just a balance, richness and economy. The churches (and they werenumerous and splendid in the University, and they were graded there alsoin all the ages of architecture, from the round arches of SaintJulianto the pointed arches of SaintSéverin), the churches dominated thewhole; and, like one harmony more in this mass of harmonies, theypierced in quick succession the multiple open work of the gables withslashed spires, with openwork bell towers, with slender pinnacles,whose line was also only a magnificent exaggeration of the acute angleof the roofs.The ground of the University was hilly; Mount SainteGeneviève formed anenormous mound to the south; and it was a sight to see from the summitof NotreDame how that throng of narrow and tortuous streets (todaythe Latin Quarter), those bunches of houses which, spread out in everydirection from the top of this eminence, precipitated themselves indisorder, and almost perpendicularly down its flanks, nearly to thewater edge, having the air, some of falling, others of clambering upagain, and all of holding to one another. A continual flux of a thousandblack points which passed each other on the pavements made everythingmove before the eyes; it was the populace seen thus from aloft and afar.Lastly, in the intervals of these roofs, of these spires, of theseaccidents of numberless edifices, which bent and writhed, and jagged inso eccentric a manner the extreme line of the University, one caught aglimpse, here and there, of a great expanse of mossgrown wall, a thick,round tower, a crenellated city gate, shadowing forth the fortress;it was the wall of Philip Augustus. Beyond, the fields gleamed green;beyond, fled the roads, along which were scattered a few more suburbanhouses, which became more infrequent as they became more distant. Someof these faubourgs were important: there were, first, starting from laTournelle, the Bourg SaintVictor, with its one arch bridge over theBièvre, its abbey where one could read the epitaph of Louis le Gros,_epitaphium Ludovici Grossi_, and its church with an octagonal spire,flanked with four little bell towers of the eleventh century (a similarone can be seen at Etampes; it is not yet destroyed); next, the BourgSaintMarceau, which already had three churches and one convent; then,leaving the mill of the Gobelins and its four white walls on the left,there was the Faubourg SaintJacques with the beautiful carved crossin its square; the church of SaintJacques du HautPas, which was thenGothic, pointed, charming; SaintMagloire, a fine nave of the fourteenthcentury, which Napoleon turned into a hayloft; NotreDame des Champs,where there were Byzantine mosaics; lastly, after having left behind,full in the country, the Monastery des Chartreux, a rich edificecontemporary with the Palais de Justice, with its little garden dividedinto compartments, and the haunted ruins of Vauvert, the eye fell, tothe west, upon the three Roman spires of SaintGermain des Prés. TheBourg SaintGermain, already a large community, formed fifteen or twentystreets in the rear; the pointed bell tower of SaintSulpice markedone corner of the town. Close beside it one descried the quadrilateralenclosure of the fair of SaintGermain, where the market is situatedtoday; then the abbot pillory, a pretty little round tower, wellcapped with a leaden cone; the brickyard was further on, and the Rue duFour, which led to the common bakehouse, and the mill on its hillock,and the lazar house, a tiny house, isolated and half seen.But that which attracted the eye most of all, and fixed it for a longtime on that point, was the abbey itself. It is certain that thismonastery, which had a grand air, both as a church and as a seignory;that abbatial palace, where the bishops of Paris counted themselveshappy if they could pass the night; that refectory, upon which thearchitect had bestowed the air, the beauty, and the rose window of acathedral; that elegant chapel of the Virgin; that monumental dormitory;those vast gardens; that portcullis; that drawbridge; that envelopeof battlements which notched to the eye the verdure of the surroundingmeadows; those courtyards, where gleamed men at arms, intermingled withgolden copes;the whole grouped and clustered about three lofty spires,with round arches, well planted upon a Gothic apse, made a magnificentfigure against the horizon.When, at length, after having contemplated the University for a longtime, you turned towards the right bank, towards the Town, the characterof the spectacle was abruptly altered. The Town, in fact much largerthan the University, was also less of a unit. At the first glance, onesaw that it was divided into many masses, singularly distinct. First, tothe eastward, in that part of the town which still takes its name fromthe marsh where Camulogènes entangled Caesar, was a pile of palaces. Theblock extended to the very water edge. Four almost contiguous Hôtels,Jouy, Sens, Barbeau, the house of the Queen, mirrored their slate peaks,broken with slender turrets, in the Seine.These four edifices filled the space from the Rue des Nonaindières, tothe abbey of the Celestins, whose spire gracefully relieved their lineof gables and battlements. A few miserable, greenish hovels, hangingover the water in front of these sumptuous Hôtels, did not preventone from seeing the fine angles of their façades, their large, squarewindows with stone mullions, their pointed porches overloaded withstatues, the vivid outlines of their walls, always clear cut, and allthose charming accidents of architecture, which cause Gothic art to havethe air of beginning its combinations afresh with every monument.Behind these palaces, extended in all directions, now broken, fenced in,battlemented like a citadel, now veiled by great trees like a Carthusianconvent, the immense and multiform enclosure of that miraculous Hôtelde SaintPol, where the King of France possessed the means of lodgingsuperbly two and twenty princes of the rank of the dauphin and the Dukeof Burgundy, with their domestics and their suites, without counting thegreat lords, and the emperor when he came to view Paris, and the lions,who had their separate Hôtel at the royal Hôtel. Let us say here thata prince apartment was then composed of never less than eleven largerooms, from the chamber of state to the oratory, not to mention thegalleries, baths, vaporbaths, and other superfluous places, withwhich each apartment was provided; not to mention the private gardensfor each of the king guests; not to mention the kitchens, thecellars, the domestic offices, the general refectories of the house, thepoultryyards, where there were twentytwo general laboratories, fromthe bakehouses to the winecellars; games of a thousand sorts, malls,tennis, and riding at the ring; aviaries, fishponds, menageries,stables, barns, libraries, arsenals and foundries. This was what aking palace, a Louvre, a Hôtel de SaintPol was then. A city within acity.From the tower where we are placed, the Hôtel SaintPol, almost halfhidden by the four great houses of which we have just spoken, wasstill very considerable and very marvellous to see. One could theredistinguish, very well, though cleverly united with the principalbuilding by long galleries, decked with painted glass and slendercolumns, the three Hôtels which Charles V. had amalgamated with hispalace: the Hôtel du PetitMuce, with the airy balustrade, which formeda graceful border to its roof; the Hôtel of the Abbe de SaintMaur,having the vanity of a stronghold, a great tower, machicolations,loopholes, iron gratings, and over the large Saxon door, the armorialbearings of the abbé, between the two mortises of the drawbridge; theHôtel of the Comte d’ Etampes, whose donjon keep, ruined at its summit,was rounded and notched like a cock comb; here and there, three orfour ancient oaks, forming a tuft together like enormous cauliflowers;gambols of swans, in the clear water of the fishponds, all in folds oflight and shade; many courtyards of which one beheld picturesque bits;the Hôtel of the Lions, with its low, pointed arches on short, Saxonpillars, its iron gratings and its perpetual roar; shooting up abovethe whole, the scaleornamented spire of the AveMaria; on the left, thehouse of the Provost of Paris, flanked by four small towers, delicatelygrooved, in the middle; at the extremity, the Hôtel SaintPol, properlyspeaking, with its multiplied façades, its successive enrichments fromthe time of Charles V., the hybrid excrescences, with which the fancy ofthe architects had loaded it during the last two centuries, with allthe apses of its chapels, all the gables of its galleries, a thousandweathercocks for the four winds, and its two lofty contiguous towers,whose conical roof, surrounded by battlements at its base, looked likethose pointed caps which have their edges turned up.Continuing to mount the stories of this amphitheatre of palaces spreadout afar upon the ground, after crossing a deep ravine hollowed outof the roofs in the Town, which marked the passage of the RueSaintAntoine, the eye reached the house of Angoulême, a vastconstruction of many epochs, where there were perfectly new and verywhite parts, which melted no better into the whole than a red patch on ablue doublet. Nevertheless, the remarkably pointed and lofty roof of themodern palace, bristling with carved eaves, covered with sheets of lead,where coiled a thousand fantastic arabesques of sparkling incrustationsof gilded bronze, that roof, so curiously damascened, darted upwardsgracefully from the midst of the brown ruins of the ancient edifice;whose huge and ancient towers, rounded by age like casks, sinkingtogether with old age, and rending themselves from top to bottom,resembled great bellies unbuttoned. Behind rose the forest of spires ofthe Palais des Tournelles. Not a view in the world, either at Chambordor at the Alhambra, is more magic, more aerial, more enchanting, thanthat thicket of spires, tiny bell towers, chimneys, weathervanes,winding staircases, lanterns through which the daylight makes its way,which seem cut out at a blow, pavilions, spindleshaped turrets, or, asthey were then called, tournelles, all differing in form, in height,and attitude. One would have pronounced it a gigantic stone chessboard.To the right of the Tournelles, that truss of enormous towers, black asink, running into each other and tied, as it were, by a circular moat;that donjon keep, much more pierced with loopholes than with windows;that drawbridge, always raised; that portcullis, always lowered,isthe Bastille. Those sorts of black beaks which project from between thebattlements, and which you take from a distance to be cave spouts, arecannons.Beneath them, at the foot of the formidable edifice, behold the PorteSainteAntoine, buried between its two towers.Beyond the Tournelles, as far as the wall of Charles V., spread out,with rich compartments of verdure and of flowers, a velvet carpet ofcultivated land and royal parks, in the midst of which one recognized,by its labyrinth of trees and alleys, the famous Daedalus garden whichLouis XI. had given to Coictier. The doctor observatory rose above thelabyrinth like a great isolated column, with a tiny house for a capital.Terrible astrologies took place in that laboratory.There today is the Place Royale.As we have just said, the quarter of the palace, of which we have justendeavored to give the reader some idea by indicating only the chiefpoints, filled the angle which Charles V. wall made with the Seine onthe east. The centre of the Town was occupied by a pile of houses forthe populace. It was there, in fact, that the three bridges disgorgedupon the right bank, and bridges lead to the building of houses ratherthan palaces. That congregation of bourgeois habitations, pressedtogether like the cells in a hive, had a beauty of its own. It is withthe roofs of a capital as with the waves of the sea,they are grand.First the streets, crossed and entangled, forming a hundred amusingfigures in the block; around the marketplace, it was like a star with athousand rays.The Rues SaintDenis and SaintMartin, with their innumerableramifications, rose one after the other, like trees intertwining theirbranches; and then the tortuous lines, the Rues de la Plâtrerie, de laVerrerie, de la Tixeranderie, etc., meandered over all. There were alsofine edifices which pierced the petrified undulations of that sea ofgables. At the head of the Pont aux Changeurs, behind which one beheldthe Seine foaming beneath the wheels of the Pont aux Meuniers, there wasthe Chalelet, no longer a Roman tower, as under Julian the Apostate, buta feudal tower of the thirteenth century, and of a stone so hard thatthe pickaxe could not break away so much as the thickness of the fistin a space of three hours; there was the rich square bell tower ofSaintJacques de la Boucherie, with its angles all frothing withcarvings, already admirable, although it was not finished in thefifteenth century. (It lacked, in particular, the four monsters, which,still perched today on the corners of its roof, have the air of somany sphinxes who are propounding to new Paris the riddle of the ancientParis. Rault, the sculptor, only placed them in position in 1526, andreceived twenty francs for his pains.) There was the MaisonauxPiliers,the Pillar House, opening upon that Place de Grève of which we havegiven the reader some idea; there was SaintGervais, which a front ingood taste has since spoiled; SaintMéry, whose ancient pointed archeswere still almost round arches; SaintJean, whose magnificent spire wasproverbial; there were twenty other monuments, which did not disdain tobury their wonders in that chaos of black, deep, narrow streets. Addthe crosses of carved stone, more lavishly scattered through thesquares than even the gibbets; the cemetery of the Innocents, whosearchitectural wall could be seen in the distance above the roofs; thepillory of the Markets, whose top was visible between two chimneys ofthe Rue de la Cossonnerie; the ladder of the CroixduTrahoir, in itssquare always black with people; the circular buildings of the wheatmart; the fragments of Philip Augustus ancient wall, which could bemade out here and there, drowned among the houses, its towers gnawed byivy, its gates in ruins, with crumbling and deformed stretches of wall;the quay with its thousand shops, and its bloody knacker yards; theSeine encumbered with boats, from the Port au Foin to Portl’Evêque, andyou will have a confused picture of what the central trapezium of theTown was like in 1482.With these two quarters, one of Hôtels, the other of houses, the thirdfeature of aspect presented by the city was a long zone of abbeys, whichbordered it in nearly the whole of its circumference, from the rising tothe setting sun, and, behind the circle of fortifications which hemmedin Paris, formed a second interior enclosure of convents and chapels.Thus, immediately adjoining the park des Tournelles, between theRue SaintAntoine and the Vielle Rue du Temple, there stoodSainteCatherine, with its immense cultivated lands, which wereterminated only by the wall of Paris. Between the old and the new Rue duTemple, there was the Temple, a sinister group of towers, lofty, erect,and isolated in the middle of a vast, battlemented enclosure. Betweenthe Rue NeuveduTemple and the Rue SaintMartin, there was the Abbeyof SaintMartin, in the midst of its gardens, a superb fortified church,whose girdle of towers, whose diadem of bell towers, yielded inforce and splendor only to SaintGermain des Prés. Between the RueSaintMartin and the Rue SaintDenis, spread the enclosure of theTrinité.Lastly, between the Rue SaintDenis, and the Rue Montorgueil, stood theFillesDieu. On one side, the rotting roofs and unpaved enclosure of theCour des Miracles could be descried. It was the sole profane ring whichwas linked to that devout chain of convents.Finally, the fourth compartment, which stretched itself out in theagglomeration of the roofs on the right bank, and which occupied thewestern angle of the enclosure, and the banks of the river down stream,was a fresh cluster of palaces and Hôtels pressed close about the baseof the Louvre. The old Louvre of Philip Augustus, that immense edificewhose great tower rallied about it three and twenty chief towers, not toreckon the lesser towers, seemed from a distance to be enshrined in theGothic roofs of the Hôtel d’Alençon, and the PetitBourbon. This hydraof towers, giant guardian of Paris, with its four and twenty heads,always erect, with its monstrous haunches, loaded or scaled with slates,and all streaming with metallic reflections, terminated with wonderfuleffect the configuration of the Town towards the west.Thus an immense block, which the Romans called _iusula_, or island, ofbourgeois houses, flanked on the right and the left by two blocks ofpalaces, crowned, the one by the Louvre, the other by the Tournelles,bordered on the north by a long girdle of abbeys and cultivatedenclosures, all amalgamated and melted together in one view; upon thesethousands of edifices, whose tiled and slated roofs outlined upon eachother so many fantastic chains, the bell towers, tattooed, fluted, andornamented with twisted bands, of the four and forty churches on theright bank; myriads of cross streets; for boundary on one side, anenclosure of lofty walls with square towers (that of the University hadround towers); on the other, the Seine, cut by bridges, and bearingon its bosom a multitude of boats; behold the Town of Paris in thefifteenth century.Beyond the walls, several suburban villages pressed close aboutthe gates, but less numerous and more scattered than those of theUniversity. Behind the Bastille there were twenty hovels clustered roundthe curious sculptures of the CroixFaubin and the flying buttresses ofthe Abbey of SaintAntoine des Champs; then Popincourt, lost amid wheatfields; then la Courtille, a merry village of wineshops; the hamlet ofSaintLaurent with its church whose bell tower, from afar, seemed toadd itself to the pointed towers of the Porte SaintMartin; theFaubourg SaintDenis, with the vast enclosure of SaintLadre; beyondthe Montmartre Gate, the GrangeBatelière, encircled with white walls;behind it, with its chalky slopes, Montmartre, which had then almost asmany churches as windmills, and which has kept only the windmills,for society no longer demands anything but bread for the body. Lastly,beyond the Louvre, the Faubourg SaintHonoré, already considerableat that time, could be seen stretching away into the fields, andPetitBretagne gleaming green, and the Marché aux Pourceaux spreadingabroad, in whose centre swelled the horrible apparatus used for boilingcounterfeiters. Between la Courtille and SaintLaurent, your eye hadalready noticed, on the summit of an eminence crouching amid desertplains, a sort of edifice which resembled from a distance a ruinedcolonnade, mounted upon a basement with its foundation laid bare. Thiswas neither a Parthenon, nor a temple of the Olympian Jupiter. It wasMontfauçon.Now, if the enumeration of so many edifices, summary as we haveendeavored to make it, has not shattered in the reader mind thegeneral image of old Paris, as we have constructed it, we willrecapitulate it in a few words. In the centre, the island of the City,resembling as to form an enormous tortoise, and throwing out its bridgeswith tiles for scales; like legs from beneath its gray shell of roofs.On the left, the monolithic trapezium, firm, dense, bristling, of theUniversity; on the right, the vast semicircle of the Town, muchmore intermixed with gardens and monuments. The three blocks, city,university, and town, marbled with innumerable streets. Across all,the Seine, fostermother Seine, as says Father Du Breul, blocked withislands, bridges, and boats. All about an immense plain, patched witha thousand sorts of cultivated plots, sown with fine villages. On theleft, Issy, Vanvres, Vaugirarde, Montrouge, Gentilly, with its roundtower and its square tower, etc.; on the right, twenty others, fromConflans to Villel’Evêque. On the horizon, a border of hills arrangedin a circle like the rim of the basin. Finally, far away to the east,Vincennes, and its seven quadrangular towers to the south, Bicêtre andits pointed turrets; to the north, SaintDenis and its spire; to thewest, Saint Cloud and its donjon keep. Such was the Paris which theravens, who lived in 1482, beheld from the summits of the towers ofNotreDame.Nevertheless, Voltaire said of this city, that before Louis XIV.,it possessed but four fine monuments: the dome of the Sorbonne, theValdeGrâce, the modern Louvre, and I know not what the fourth wastheLuxembourg, perhaps. Fortunately, Voltaire was the author of Candide in spite of this, and in spite of this, he is, among all the men whohave followed each other in the long series of humanity, the one who hasbest possessed the diabolical laugh. Moreover, this proves that one canbe a fine genius, and yet understand nothing of an art to which onedoes not belong. Did not Moliere imagine that he was doing Raphael andMichaelAngelo a very great honor, by calling them those Mignards oftheir age?Let us return to Paris and to the fifteenth century.It was not then merely a handsome city; it was a homogeneous city, anarchitectural and historical product of the Middle Ages, a chronicle instone. It was a city formed of two layers only; the Romanesque layer andthe Gothic layer; for the Roman layer had disappeared long before, withthe exception of the Hot Baths of Julian, where it still piercedthrough the thick crust of the Middle Ages. As for the Celtic layer, nospecimens were any longer to be found, even when sinking wells.Fifty years later, when the Renaissance began to mingle with thisunity which was so severe and yet so varied, the dazzling luxury ofits fantasies and systems, its debasements of Roman round arches, Greekcolumns, and Gothic bases, its sculpture which was so tender and soideal, its peculiar taste for arabesques and acanthus leaves, itsarchitectural paganism, contemporary with Luther, Paris, was perhaps,still more beautiful, although less harmonious to the eye, and to thethought.But this splendid moment lasted only for a short time; the Renaissancewas not impartial; it did not content itself with building, it wishedto destroy; it is true that it required the room. Thus Gothic Paris wascomplete only for a moment. SaintJacques de la Boucherie had barelybeen completed when the demolition of the old Louvre was begun.After that, the great city became more disfigured every day. GothicParis, beneath which Roman Paris was effaced, was effaced in its turn;but can any one say what Paris has replaced it?There is the Paris of Catherine de Medicis at the Tuileries;theParis of Henri II., at the Hôtel de Ville, two edifices still in finetaste;the Paris of Henri IV., at the Place Royale: façades of brickwith stone corners, and slated roofs, tricolored houses;the Paris ofLouis XIII., at the ValdeGrace: a crushed and squat architecture, withvaults like baskethandles, and something indescribably potbellied inthe column, and thickset in the dome;the Paris of Louis XIV., inthe Invalides: grand, rich, gilded, cold;the Paris of Louis XV., inSaintSulpice: volutes, knots of ribbon, clouds, vermicelli and chiccoryleaves, all in stone;the Paris of Louis XVI., in the Pantheon: SaintPeter of Rome, badly copied (the edifice is awkwardly heaped together,which has not amended its lines);the Paris of the Republic, in theSchool of Medicine: a poor Greek and Roman taste, which resemblesthe Coliseum or the Parthenon as the constitution of the year III.,resembles the laws of Minos,it is called in architecture, theMessidor taste;the Paris of Napoleon in the Place Vendome: thisone is sublime, a column of bronze made of cannons;the Paris of theRestoration, at the Bourse: a very white colonnade supporting a verysmooth frieze; the whole is square and cost twenty millions.    We have seen with sorrow mingled with indignation, that itis the intention to increase, to recast, to make over, that is to say,to destroy this admirable palace. The architects of our day have tooheavy a hand to touch these delicate works of the Renaissance. We stillcherish a hope that they will not dare. Moreover, this demolition of theTuileries now, would be not only a brutal deed of violence, whichwould make a drunken vandal blushit would be an act of treason.The Tuileries is not simply a masterpiece of the art of the sixteenthcentury, it is a page of the history of the nineteenth. This palace nolonger belongs to the king, but to the people. Let us leave it as it is.Our revolution has twice set its seal upon its front. On one of its twofaçades, there are the cannonballs of the 10th of August; on the other,the balls of the 29th of July. It is sacred. Paris, April 1, 1831. (Noteto the fifth edition.)    The tenth month of the French republican calendar, from the19th of June to the 18th of July.To each of these characteristic monuments there is attached by asimilarity of taste, fashion, and attitude, a certain number ofhouses scattered about in different quarters and which the eyes of theconnoisseur easily distinguishes and furnishes with a date. Whenone knows how to look, one finds the spirit of a century, and thephysiognomy of a king, even in the knocker on a door.The Paris of the present day has then, no general physiognomy. It isa collection of specimens of many centuries, and the finest havedisappeared. The capital grows only in houses, and what houses! At therate at which Paris is now proceeding, it will renew itself every fiftyyears.Thus the historical significance of its architecture is being effacedevery day. Monuments are becoming rarer and rarer, and one seems to seethem gradually engulfed, by the flood of houses. Our fathers had a Parisof stone; our sons will have one of plaster.So far as the modern monuments of new Paris are concerned, we wouldgladly be excused from mentioning them. It is not that we do not admirethem as they deserve. The SainteGeneviève of M. Soufflot is certainlythe finest Savoy cake that has ever been made in stone. The Palace ofthe Legion of Honor is also a very distinguished bit of pastry. Thedome of the wheat market is an English jockey cap, on a grand scale. Thetowers of SaintSulpice are two huge clarinets, and the form is as goodas any other; the telegraph, contorted and grimacing, forms anadmirable accident upon their roofs. SaintRoch has a door which, formagnificence, is comparable only to that of SaintThomas d’Aquin. Ithas, also, a crucifixion in high relief, in a cellar, with a sun ofgilded wood. These things are fairly marvellous. The lantern of thelabyrinth of the Jardin des Plantes is also very ingenious.As for the Palace of the Bourse, which is Greek as to its colonnade,Roman in the round arches of its doors and windows, of the Renaissanceby virtue of its flattened vault, it is indubitably a very correct andvery pure monument; the proof is that it is crowned with an attic, suchas was never seen in Athens, a beautiful, straight line, gracefullybroken here and there by stovepipes. Let us add that if it is accordingto rule that the architecture of a building should be adapted to itspurpose in such a manner that this purpose shall be immediately apparentfrom the mere aspect of the building, one cannot be too much amazed at astructure which might be indifferentlythe palace of a king, a chamberof communes, a townhall, a college, a ridingschool, an academy, awarehouse, a courthouse, a museum, a barracks, a sepulchre, a temple,or a theatre. However, it is an Exchange. An edifice ought to be,moreover, suitable to the climate. This one is evidently constructedexpressly for our cold and rainy skies. It has a roof almost as flat asroofs in the East, which involves sweeping the roof in winter, when itsnows; and of course roofs are made to be swept. As for its purpose, ofwhich we just spoke, it fulfils it to a marvel; it is a bourse in Franceas it would have been a temple in Greece. It is true that the architectwas at a good deal of trouble to conceal the clock face, which wouldhave destroyed the purity of the fine lines of the façade; but, on theother hand, we have that colonnade which circles round the edifice andunder which, on days of high religious ceremony, the theories ofthe stockbrokers and the courtiers of commerce can be developed somajestically.These are very superb structures. Let us add a quantity of fine,amusing, and varied streets, like the Rue de Rivoli, and I do notdespair of Paris presenting to the eye, when viewed from a balloon, thatrichness of line, that opulence of detail, that diversity of aspect,that grandiose something in the simple, and unexpected in the beautiful,which characterizes a checkerboard.However, admirable as the Paris of today may seem to you, reconstructthe Paris of the fifteenth century, call it up before you in thought;look at the sky athwart that surprising forest of spires, towers, andbelfries; spread out in the centre of the city, tear away at the pointof the islands, fold at the arches of the bridges, the Seine, withits broad green and yellow expanses, more variable than the skin of aserpent; project clearly against an azure horizon the Gothic profileof this ancient Paris. Make its contour float in a winter mist whichclings to its numerous chimneys; drown it in profound night and watchthe odd play of lights and shadows in that sombre labyrinth of edifices;cast upon it a ray of light which shall vaguely outline it and cause toemerge from the fog the great heads of the towers; or take that blacksilhouette again, enliven with shadow the thousand acute angles of thespires and gables, and make it start out more toothed than a shark jawagainst a coppercolored western sky,and then compare.And if you wish to receive of the ancient city an impression with whichthe modern one can no longer furnish you, climbon the morning of somegrand festival, beneath the rising sun of Easter or of Pentecostclimbupon some elevated point, whence you command the entire capital; and bepresent at the wakening of the chimes. Behold, at a signal given fromheaven, for it is the sun which gives it, all those churches quiversimultaneously. First come scattered strokes, running from one churchto another, as when musicians give warning that they are about to begin.Then, all at once, behold!for it seems at times, as though the earalso possessed a sight of its own,behold, rising from each belltower, something like a column of sound, a cloud of harmony. First, thevibration of each bell mounts straight upwards, pure and, so to speak,isolated from the others, into the splendid morning sky; then, littleby little, as they swell they melt together, mingle, are lost in eachother, and amalgamate in a magnificent concert. It is no longer anythingbut a mass of sonorous vibrations incessantly sent forth from thenumerous belfries; floats, undulates, bounds, whirls over the city,and prolongs far beyond the horizon the deafening circle of itsoscillations.Nevertheless, this sea of harmony is not a chaos; great and profound asit is, it has not lost its transparency; you behold the windings ofeach group of notes which escapes from the belfries. You can follow thedialogue, by turns grave and shrill, of the treble and the bass; you cansee the octaves leap from one tower to another; you watch them springforth, winged, light, and whistling, from the silver bell, to fall,broken and limping from the bell of wood; you admire in their midst therich gamut which incessantly ascends and reascends the seven bellsof SaintEustache; you see light and rapid notes running across it,executing three or four luminous zigzags, and vanishing like flashesof lightning. Yonder is the Abbey of SaintMartin, a shrill, crackedsinger; here the gruff and gloomy voice of the Bastille; at the otherend, the great tower of the Louvre, with its bass. The royal chime ofthe palace scatters on all sides, and without relaxation, resplendenttrills, upon which fall, at regular intervals, the heavy strokes fromthe belfry of NotreDame, which makes them sparkle like the anvil underthe hammer. At intervals you behold the passage of sounds of all formswhich come from the triple peal of SaintGermaine des Prés. Then, again,from time to time, this mass of sublime noises opens and gives passageto the beats of the Ave Maria, which bursts forth and sparkles likean aigrette of stars. Below, in the very depths of the concert, youconfusedly distinguish the interior chanting of the churches, whichexhales through the vibrating pores of their vaulted roofs.Assuredly, this is an opera which it is worth the trouble of listeningto. Ordinarily, the noise which escapes from Paris by day is the cityspeaking; by night, it is the city breathing; in this case, it is thecity singing. Lend an ear, then, to this concert of bell towers; spreadover all the murmur of half a million men, the eternal plaint of theriver, the infinite breathings of the wind, the grave and distantquartette of the four forests arranged upon the hills, on the horizon,like immense stacks of organ pipes; extinguish, as in a half shade,all that is too hoarse and too shrill about the central chime, andsay whether you know anything in the world more rich and joyful, moregolden, more dazzling, than this tumult of bells and chimes;thanthis furnace of music,than these ten thousand brazen voices chantingsimultaneously in the flutes of stone, three hundred feet high,thanthis city which is no longer anything but an orchestra,than thissymphony which produces the noise of a tempest.BOOK FOURTH.CHAPTER I. GOOD SOULS.Sixteen years previous to the epoch when this story takes place, onefine morning, on Quasimodo Sunday, a living creature had been deposited,after mass, in the church of NotreDame, on the wooden bed securelyfixed in the vestibule on the left, opposite that great image of SaintChristopher, which the figure of Messire Antoine des Essarts, chevalier,carved in stone, had been gazing at on his knees since 1413, whenthey took it into their heads to overthrow the saint and the faithfulfollower. Upon this bed of wood it was customary to expose foundlingsfor public charity. Whoever cared to take them did so. In front of thewooden bed was a copper basin for alms.The sort of living being which lay upon that plank on the morning ofQuasimodo, in the year of the Lord, 1467, appeared to excite to a highdegree, the curiosity of the numerous group which had congregated aboutthe wooden bed. The group was formed for the most part of the fair sex.Hardly any one was there except old women.In the first row, and among those who were most bent over the bed, fourwere noticeable, who, from their gray _cagoule_, a sort of cassock, wererecognizable as attached to some devout sisterhood. I do not seewhy history has not transmitted to posterity the names of these fourdiscreet and venerable damsels. They were Agnes la Herme, Jehanne de laTarme, Henriette la Gaultière, Gauchère la Violette, all four widows,all four dames of the Chapel Etienne Haudry, who had quitted theirhouse with the permission of their mistress, and in conformity with thestatutes of Pierre d’Ailly, in order to come and hear the sermon.However, if these good Haudriettes were, for the moment, complying withthe statutes of Pierre d’Ailly, they certainly violated with joy thoseof Michel de Brache, and the Cardinal of Pisa, which so inhumanlyenjoined silence upon them.What is this, sister? said Agnes to Gauchère, gazing at the littlecreature exposed, which was screaming and writhing on the wooden bed,terrified by so many glances.What is to become of us, said Jehanne, if that is the way childrenare made now?I’m not learned in the matter of children, resumed Agnes, but it mustbe a sin to look at this one.Tis not a child, Agnes.Tis an abortion of a monkey, remarked Gauchère.Tis a miracle, interposed Henriette la Gaultière.Then, remarked Agnes, it is the third since the Sunday of the_Loetare_: for, in less than a week, we had the miracle of the mocker ofpilgrims divinely punished by NotreDame d’Aubervilliers, and that wasthe second miracle within a month.This pretended foundling is a real monster of abomination, resumedJehanne.He yells loud enough to deafen a chanter, continued Gauchère. Holdyour tongue, you little howler!To think that Monsieur of Reims sent this enormity to Monsieur ofParis, added la Gaultière, clasping her hands.I imagine, said Agnes la Herme, that it is a beast, an animal,thefruit ofa Jew and a sow; something not Christian, in short, whichought to be thrown into the fire or into the water.I really hope, resumed la Gaultière, that nobody will apply for it.Ah, good heavens! exclaimed Agnes; those poor nurses yonder in thefoundling asylum, which forms the lower end of the lane as you go to theriver, just beside Monseigneur the bishop! what if this little monsterwere to be carried to them to suckle? I’d rather give suck to avampire.How innocent that poor la Herme is! resumed Jehanne; don’t you see,sister, that this little monster is at least four years old, and that hewould have less appetite for your breast than for a turnspit.The little monster we should find it difficult ourselves to describehim otherwise, was, in fact, not a newborn child. It was a very angularand very lively little mass, imprisoned in its linen sack, stamped withthe cipher of Messire Guillaume Chartier, then bishop of Paris, with ahead projecting. That head was deformed enough; one beheld only a forestof red hair, one eye, a mouth, and teeth. The eye wept, the mouthcried, and the teeth seemed to ask only to be allowed to bite. The wholestruggled in the sack, to the great consternation of the crowd, whichincreased and was renewed incessantly around it.Dame Aloise de Gondelaurier, a rich and noble woman, who held by thehand a pretty girl about five or six years of age, and dragged a longveil about, suspended to the golden horn of her headdress, halted as shepassed the wooden bed, and gazed for a moment at the wretched creature,while her charming little daughter, FleurdeLys de Gondelaurier,spelled out with her tiny, pretty finger, the permanent inscriptionattached to the wooden bed: Foundlings.Really, said the dame, turning away in disgust, I thought that theyonly exposed children here.She turned her back, throwing into the basin a silver florin, which rangamong the liards, and made the poor goodwives of the chapel of EtienneHaudry open their eyes.A moment later, the grave and learned Robert Mistricolle, the kingprotonotary, passed, with an enormous missal under one arm and his wifeon the other (Damoiselle Guillemette la Mairesse), having thus by hisside his two regulators,spiritual and temporal.Foundling! he said, after examining the object; found, apparently, onthe banks of the river Phlegethon.One can only see one eye, observed Damoiselle Guillemette; there is awart on the other.It not a wart, returned Master Robert Mistricolle, it is an eggwhich contains another demon exactly similar, who bears another littleegg which contains another devil, and so on.How do you know that? asked Guillemette la Mairesse.I know it pertinently, replied the protonotary.Monsieur le protonotare, asked Gauchère, what do you prognosticate ofthis pretended foundling?The greatest misfortunes, replied Mistricolle.Ah! good heavens! said an old woman among the spectators, and thatbesides our having had a considerable pestilence last year, and thatthey say that the English are going to disembark in a company atHarfleur.Perhaps that will prevent the queen from coming to Paris in the monthof September, interposed another; trade is so bad already.My opinion is, exclaimed Jehanne de la Tarme, that it would be betterfor the louts of Paris, if this little magician were put to bed on afagot than on a plank.A fine, flaming fagot, added the old woman.It would be more prudent, said Mistricolle.For several minutes, a young priest had been listening to the reasoningof the Haudriettes and the sentences of the notary. He had a severeface, with a large brow, a profound glance. He thrust the crowd silentlyaside, scrutinized the little magician, and stretched out his handupon him. It was high time, for all the devotees were already lickingtheir chops over the fine, flaming fagot.I adopt this child, said the priest.He took it in his cassock and carried it off. The spectators followedhim with frightened glances. A moment later, he had disappeared throughthe Red Door, which then led from the church to the cloister.When the first surprise was over, Jehanne de la Tarme bent down to theear of la Gaultière,I told you so, sister,that young clerk, Monsieur Claude Frollo, is asorcerer.CHAPTER II. CLAUDE FROLLO.In fact, Claude Frollo was no common person.He belonged to one of those middleclass families which were calledindifferently, in the impertinent language of the last century, the high_bourgeoise_ or the petty nobility. This family had inherited from thebrothers Paclet the fief of Tirechappe, which was dependent upon theBishop of Paris, and whose twentyone houses had been in the thirteenthcentury the object of so many suits before the official. As possessor ofthis fief, Claude Frollo was one of the twentyseven seigneurs keepingclaim to a manor in fee in Paris and its suburbs; and for a long time,his name was to be seen inscribed in this quality, between the Hôtelde Tancarville, belonging to Master François Le Rez, and the college ofTours, in the records deposited at Saint Martin des Champs.Claude Frollo had been destined from infancy, by his parents, to theecclesiastical profession. He had been taught to read in Latin; he hadbeen trained to keep his eyes on the ground and to speak low. Whilestill a child, his father had cloistered him in the college of Torchi inthe University. There it was that he had grown up, on the missal and thelexicon.Moreover, he was a sad, grave, serious child, who studied ardently, andlearned quickly; he never uttered a loud cry in recreation hour, mixedbut little in the bacchanals of the Rue du Fouarre, did not know what itwas to _dare alapas et capillos laniare_, and had cut no figure in thatrevolt of 1463, which the annalists register gravely, under the titleof The sixth trouble of the University. He seldom rallied the poorstudents of Montaigu on the _cappettes_ from which they derived theirname, or the bursars of the college of Dormans on their shaved tonsure,and their surtout particolored of bluishgreen, blue, and violet cloth,_azurini coloris et bruni_, as says the charter of the Cardinal desQuatreCouronnes.On the other hand, he was assiduous at the great and the small schoolsof the Rue Saint Jean de Beauvais. The first pupil whom the Abbé deSaint Pierre de Val, at the moment of beginning his reading oncanon law, always perceived, glued to a pillar of the schoolSaintVendregesile, opposite his rostrum, was Claude Frollo, armed withhis horn inkbottle, biting his pen, scribbling on his threadbare knee,and, in winter, blowing on his fingers. The first auditor whom MessireMiles d’Isliers, doctor in decretals, saw arrive every Monday morning,all breathless, at the opening of the gates of the school of theChefSaintDenis, was Claude Frollo. Thus, at sixteen years of age, theyoung clerk might have held his own, in mystical theology, against afather of the church; in canonical theology, against a father of thecouncils; in scholastic theology, against a doctor of Sorbonne.Theology conquered, he had plunged into decretals. From the Master ofSentences, he had passed to the Capitularies of Charlemagne; and hehad devoured in succession, in his appetite for science, decretals upondecretals, those of Theodore, Bishop of Hispalus; those of Bouchard,Bishop of Worms; those of Yves, Bishop of Chartres; next the decretalof Gratian, which succeeded the capitularies of Charlemagne; thenthe collection of Gregory IX.; then the Epistle of _Superspecula_, ofHonorius III. He rendered clear and familiar to himself that vast andtumultuous period of civil law and canon law in conflict and at strifewith each other, in the chaos of the Middle Ages,a period which BishopTheodore opens in 618, and which Pope Gregory closes in 1227.Decretals digested, he flung himself upon medicine, on the liberal arts.He studied the science of herbs, the science of unguents; he became anexpert in fevers and in contusions, in sprains and abcesses. Jacquesd’ Espars would have received him as a physician; Richard Hellain, as asurgeon. He also passed through all the degrees of licentiate, master,and doctor of arts. He studied the languages, Latin, Greek, Hebrew, atriple sanctuary then very little frequented. His was a veritable feverfor acquiring and hoarding, in the matter of science. At the age ofeighteen, he had made his way through the four faculties; it seemed tothe young man that life had but one sole object: learning.It was towards this epoch, that the excessive heat of the summer of 1466caused that grand outburst of the plague which carried off more thanforty thousand souls in the vicomty of Paris, and among others, as Jeande Troyes states, Master Arnoul, astrologer to the king, who was a veryfine man, both wise and pleasant. The rumor spread in the Universitythat the Rue Tirechappe was especially devastated by the malady. It wasthere that Claude parents resided, in the midst of their fief. Theyoung scholar rushed in great alarm to the paternal mansion. Whenhe entered it, he found that both father and mother had died on thepreceding day. A very young brother of his, who was in swaddlingclothes, was still alive and crying abandoned in his cradle. This wasall that remained to Claude of his family; the young man took the childunder his arm and went off in a pensive mood. Up to that moment, he hadlived only in science; he now began to live in life.This catastrophe was a crisis in Claude existence. Orphaned, theeldest, head of the family at the age of nineteen, he felt himselfrudely recalled from the reveries of school to the realities of thisworld. Then, moved with pity, he was seized with passion and devotiontowards that child, his brother; a sweet and strange thing was a humanaffection to him, who had hitherto loved his books alone.This affection developed to a singular point; in a soul so new, it waslike a first love. Separated since infancy from his parents, whom he hadhardly known; cloistered and immured, as it were, in his books; eagerabove all things to study and to learn; exclusively attentive up tothat time, to his intelligence which broadened in science, to hisimagination, which expanded in letters,the poor scholar had not yethad time to feel the place of his heart.This young brother, without mother or father, this little child whichhad fallen abruptly from heaven into his arms, made a new man of him.He perceived that there was something else in the world besides thespeculations of the Sorbonne, and the verses of Homer; that man neededaffections; that life without tenderness and without love was only a setof dry, shrieking, and rending wheels. Only, he imagined, for he was atthe age when illusions are as yet replaced only by illusions, that theaffections of blood and family were the sole ones necessary, and that alittle brother to love sufficed to fill an entire existence.He threw himself, therefore, into the love for his little Jehan with thepassion of a character already profound, ardent, concentrated; that poorfrail creature, pretty, fairhaired, rosy, and curly,that orphan withanother orphan for his only support, touched him to the bottom of hisheart; and grave thinker as he was, he set to meditating upon Jehanwith an infinite compassion. He kept watch and ward over him as oversomething very fragile, and very worthy of care. He was more than abrother to the child; he became a mother to him.Little Jehan had lost his mother while he was still at the breast;Claude gave him to a nurse. Besides the fief of Tirechappe, he hadinherited from his father the fief of Moulin, which was a dependency ofthe square tower of Gentilly; it was a mill on a hill, near the châteauof Winchestre (Bicêtre). There was a miller wife there who was nursinga fine child; it was not far from the university, and Claude carried thelittle Jehan to her in his own arms.From that time forth, feeling that he had a burden to bear, he took lifevery seriously. The thought of his little brother became not only hisrecreation, but the object of his studies. He resolved to consecratehimself entirely to a future for which he was responsible in the sightof God, and never to have any other wife, any other child than thehappiness and fortune of his brother. Therefore, he attached himselfmore closely than ever to the clerical profession. His merits, hislearning, his quality of immediate vassal of the Bishop of Paris, threwthe doors of the church wide open to him. At the age of twenty, byspecial dispensation of the Holy See, he was a priest, and served asthe youngest of the chaplains of NotreDame the altar which is called,because of the late mass which is said there, _altare pigrorum_.There, plunged more deeply than ever in his dear books, which he quittedonly to run for an hour to the fief of Moulin, this mixture of learningand austerity, so rare at his age, had promptly acquired for himthe respect and admiration of the monastery. From the cloister, hisreputation as a learned man had passed to the people, among whom it hadchanged a little, a frequent occurrence at that time, into reputation asa sorcerer.It was at the moment when he was returning, on Quasimodo day, fromsaying his mass at the Altar of the Lazy, which was by the side of thedoor leading to the nave on the right, near the image of the Virgin,that his attention had been attracted by the group of old womenchattering around the bed for foundlings.Then it was that he approached the unhappy little creature, which was sohated and so menaced. That distress, that deformity, that abandonment,the thought of his young brother, the idea which suddenly occurred tohim, that if he were to die, his dear little Jehan might also be flungmiserably on the plank for foundlings,all this had gone to his heartsimultaneously; a great pity had moved in him, and he had carried offthe child.When he removed the child from the sack, he found it greatly deformed,in very sooth. The poor little wretch had a wart on his left eye, hishead placed directly on his shoulders, his spinal column was crooked,his breast bone prominent, and his legs bowed; but he appeared tobe lively; and although it was impossible to say in what languagehe lisped, his cry indicated considerable force and health. Claudecompassion increased at the sight of this ugliness; and he made a vow inhis heart to rear the child for the love of his brother, in order that,whatever might be the future faults of the little Jehan, he should havebeside him that charity done for his sake. It was a sort of investmentof good works, which he was effecting in the name of his young brother;it was a stock of good works which he wished to amass in advance forhim, in case the little rogue should some day find himself short of thatcoin, the only sort which is received at the tollbar of paradise.He baptized his adopted child, and gave him the name of Quasimodo,either because he desired thereby to mark the day, when he had foundhim, or because he wished to designate by that name to what a degree thepoor little creature was incomplete, and hardly sketched out. In fact,Quasimodo, blind, hunchbacked, knockkneed, was only an almost.CHAPTER III. _IMMANIS PECORIS CUSTOS, IMMANIOR IPSE_.Now, in 1482, Quasimodo had grown up. He had become a few yearspreviously the bellringer of NotreDame, thanks to his father byadoption, Claude Frollo,who had become archdeacon of Josas, thanksto his suzerain, Messire Louis de Beaumont,who had become Bishop ofParis, at the death of Guillaume Chartier in 1472, thanks to his patron,Olivier Le Daim, barber to Louis XI., king by the grace of God.So Quasimodo was the ringer of the chimes of NotreDame.In the course of time there had been formed a certain peculiarlyintimate bond which united the ringer to the church. Separated foreverfrom the world, by the double fatality of his unknown birth and hisnatural deformity, imprisoned from his infancy in that impassable doublecircle, the poor wretch had grown used to seeing nothing in this worldbeyond the religious walls which had received him under their shadow.NotreDame had been to him successively, as he grew up and developed,the egg, the nest, the house, the country, the universe.There was certainly a sort of mysterious and preexisting harmonybetween this creature and this church. When, still a little fellow, hehad dragged himself tortuously and by jerks beneath the shadows ofits vaults, he seemed, with his human face and his bestial limbs, thenatural reptile of that humid and sombre pavement, upon which the shadowof the Romanesque capitals cast so many strange forms.Later on, the first time that he caught hold, mechanically, of theropes to the towers, and hung suspended from them, and set the bell toclanging, it produced upon his adopted father, Claude, the effect of achild whose tongue is unloosed and who begins to speak.It is thus that, little by little, developing always in sympathy withthe cathedral, living there, sleeping there, hardly ever leaving it,subject every hour to the mysterious impress, he came to resemble it, heincrusted himself in it, so to speak, and became an integral part of it.His salient angles fitted into the retreating angles of the cathedral(if we may be allowed this figure of speech), and he seemed not only itsinhabitant but more than that, its natural tenant. One might almostsay that he had assumed its form, as the snail takes on the form ofits shell. It was his dwelling, his hole, his envelope. There existedbetween him and the old church so profound an instinctive sympathy, somany magnetic affinities, so many material affinities, that he adheredto it somewhat as a tortoise adheres to its shell. The rough andwrinkled cathedral was his shell.It is useless to warn the reader not to take literally all thesimiles which we are obliged to employ here to express the singular,symmetrical, direct, almost consubstantial union of a man and anedifice. It is equally unnecessary to state to what a degree thatwhole cathedral was familiar to him, after so long and so intimate acohabitation. That dwelling was peculiar to him. It had no depths towhich Quasimodo had not penetrated, no height which he had not scaled.He often climbed many stones up the front, aided solely by the unevenpoints of the carving. The towers, on whose exterior surface he wasfrequently seen clambering, like a lizard gliding along a perpendicularwall, those two gigantic twins, so lofty, so menacing, so formidable,possessed for him neither vertigo, nor terror, nor shocks of amazement.To see them so gentle under his hand, so easy to scale, one would havesaid that he had tamed them. By dint of leaping, climbing, gambollingamid the abysses of the gigantic cathedral he had become, in some sort,a monkey and a goat, like the Calabrian child who swims before he walks,and plays with the sea while still a babe.Moreover, it was not his body alone which seemed fashioned after theCathedral, but his mind also. In what condition was that mind? Whatbent had it contracted, what form had it assumed beneath that knottedenvelope, in that savage life? This it would be hard to determine.Quasimodo had been born oneeyed, hunchbacked, lame. It was withgreat difficulty, and by dint of great patience that Claude Frollo hadsucceeded in teaching him to talk. But a fatality was attached to thepoor foundling. Bellringer of NotreDame at the age of fourteen, a newinfirmity had come to complete his misfortunes: the bells had broken thedrums of his ears; he had become deaf. The only gate which nature hadleft wide open for him had been abruptly closed, and forever.In closing, it had cut off the only ray of joy and of light which stillmade its way into the soul of Quasimodo. His soul fell into profoundnight. The wretched being misery became as incurable and as completeas his deformity. Let us add that his deafness rendered him to someextent dumb. For, in order not to make others laugh, the very momentthat he found himself to be deaf, he resolved upon a silence which heonly broke when he was alone. He voluntarily tied that tongue whichClaude Frollo had taken so much pains to unloose. Hence, it came about,that when necessity constrained him to speak, his tongue was torpid,awkward, and like a door whose hinges have grown rusty.If now we were to try to penetrate to the soul of Quasimodo through thatthick, hard rind; if we could sound the depths of that badly constructedorganism; if it were granted to us to look with a torch behind thosenontransparent organs to explore the shadowy interior of that opaquecreature, to elucidate his obscure corners, his absurd nothoroughfares,and suddenly to cast a vivid light upon the soul enchained at theextremity of that cave, we should, no doubt, find the unhappy Psyche insome poor, cramped, and ricketty attitude, like those prisoners beneaththe Leads of Venice, who grew old bent double in a stone box which wasboth too low and too short for them.It is certain that the mind becomes atrophied in a defective body.Quasimodo was barely conscious of a soul cast in his own image, movingblindly within him. The impressions of objects underwent a considerablerefraction before reaching his mind. His brain was a peculiar medium;the ideas which passed through it issued forth completely distorted.The reflection which resulted from this refraction was, necessarily,divergent and perverted.Hence a thousand optical illusions, a thousand aberrations of judgment,a thousand deviations, in which his thought strayed, now mad, nowidiotic.The first effect of this fatal organization was to trouble the glancewhich he cast upon things. He received hardly any immediate perceptionof them. The external world seemed much farther away to him than it doesto us.The second effect of his misfortune was to render him malicious.He was malicious, in fact, because he was savage; he was savage becausehe was ugly. There was logic in his nature, as there is in ours.His strength, so extraordinarily developed, was a cause of still greatermalevolence: _Malus puer robustus_, says Hobbes.This justice must, however be rendered to him. Malevolence was not,perhaps, innate in him. From his very first steps among men, he had felthimself, later on he had seen himself, spewed out, blasted, rejected.Human words were, for him, always a raillery or a malediction. As hegrew up, he had found nothing but hatred around him. He had caught thegeneral malevolence. He had picked up the weapon with which he had beenwounded.After all, he turned his face towards men only with reluctance;his cathedral was sufficient for him. It was peopled with marblefigures,kings, saints, bishops,who at least did not burst outlaughing in his face, and who gazed upon him only with tranquillityand kindliness. The other statues, those of the monsters and demons,cherished no hatred for him, Quasimodo. He resembled them too much forthat. They seemed rather, to be scoffing at other men. The saints werehis friends, and blessed him; the monsters were his friends and guardedhim. So he held long communion with them. He sometimes passed wholehours crouching before one of these statues, in solitary conversationwith it. If any one came, he fled like a lover surprised in hisserenade.And the cathedral was not only society for him, but the universe, andall nature beside. He dreamed of no other hedgerows than the paintedwindows, always in flower; no other shade than that of the foliage ofstone which spread out, loaded with birds, in the tufts of the Saxoncapitals; of no other mountains than the colossal towers of the church;of no other ocean than Paris, roaring at their bases.What he loved above all else in the maternal edifice, that which arousedhis soul, and made it open its poor wings, which it kept so miserablyfolded in its cavern, that which sometimes rendered him even happy, wasthe bells. He loved them, fondled them, talked to them, understood them.From the chime in the spire, over the intersection of the aisles andnave, to the great bell of the front, he cherished a tenderness for themall. The central spire and the two towers were to him as three greatcages, whose birds, reared by himself, sang for him alone. Yet it wasthese very bells which had made him deaf; but mothers often love bestthat child which has caused them the most suffering.It is true that their voice was the only one which he could stillhear. On this score, the big bell was his beloved. It was she whom hepreferred out of all that family of noisy girls which bustled abovehim, on festival days. This bell was named Marie. She was alone in thesouthern tower, with her sister Jacqueline, a bell of lesser size, shutup in a smaller cage beside hers. This Jacqueline was so called from thename of the wife of Jean Montagu, who had given it to the church, whichhad not prevented his going and figuring without his head at Montfauçon.In the second tower there were six other bells, and, finally, sixsmaller ones inhabited the belfry over the crossing, with the woodenbell, which rang only between after dinner on Good Friday and themorning of the day before Easter. So Quasimodo had fifteen bells in hisseraglio; but big Marie was his favorite.No idea can be formed of his delight on days when the grand peal wassounded. At the moment when the archdeacon dismissed him, and said,Go! he mounted the spiral staircase of the clock tower faster than anyone else could have descended it. He entered perfectly breathless intothe aerial chamber of the great bell; he gazed at her a moment, devoutlyand lovingly; then he gently addressed her and patted her with hishand, like a good horse, which is about to set out on a long journey.He pitied her for the trouble that she was about to suffer. After thesefirst caresses, he shouted to his assistants, placed in the lower storyof the tower, to begin. They grasped the ropes, the wheel creaked, theenormous capsule of metal started slowly into motion. Quasimodo followedit with his glance and trembled. The first shock of the clapper andthe brazen wall made the framework upon which it was mounted quiver.Quasimodo vibrated with the bell.Vah! he cried, with a senseless burst of laughter. However, themovement of the bass was accelerated, and, in proportion as it describeda wider angle, Quasimodo eye opened also more and more widely,phosphoric and flaming. At length the grand peal began; the whole towertrembled; woodwork, leads, cut stones, all groaned at once, from thepiles of the foundation to the trefoils of its summit. Then Quasimodoboiled and frothed; he went and came; he trembled from head to foot withthe tower. The bell, furious, running riot, presented to the twowalls of the tower alternately its brazen throat, whence escaped thattempestuous breath, which is audible leagues away. Quasimodo stationedhimself in front of this open throat; he crouched and rose with theoscillations of the bell, breathed in this overwhelming breath, gazedby turns at the deep place, which swarmed with people, two hundred feetbelow him, and at that enormous, brazen tongue which came, second aftersecond, to howl in his ear.It was the only speech which he understood, the only sound which brokefor him the universal silence. He swelled out in it as a bird does inthe sun. All of a sudden, the frenzy of the bell seized upon him; hislook became extraordinary; he lay in wait for the great bell as itpassed, as a spider lies in wait for a fly, and flung himself abruptlyupon it, with might and main. Then, suspended above the abyss, borneto and fro by the formidable swinging of the bell, he seized the brazenmonster by the earlaps, pressed it between both knees, spurred it onwith his heels, and redoubled the fury of the peal with the whole shockand weight of his body. Meanwhile, the tower trembled; he shrieked andgnashed his teeth, his red hair rose erect, his breast heaving like abellows, his eye flashed flames, the monstrous bell neighed, panting,beneath him; and then it was no longer the great bell of NotreDame norQuasimodo: it was a dream, a whirlwind, a tempest, dizziness mountedastride of noise; a spirit clinging to a flying crupper, a strangecentaur, half man, half bell; a sort of horrible Astolphus, borne awayupon a prodigious hippogriff of living bronze.The presence of this extraordinary being caused, as it were, a breath oflife to circulate throughout the entire cathedral. It seemed as thoughthere escaped from him, at least according to the growing superstitionsof the crowd, a mysterious emanation which animated all the stones ofNotreDame, and made the deep bowels of the ancient church to palpitate.It sufficed for people to know that he was there, to make them believethat they beheld the thousand statues of the galleries and the fronts inmotion. And the cathedral did indeed seem a docile and obedient creaturebeneath his hand; it waited on his will to raise its great voice; itwas possessed and filled with Quasimodo, as with a familiar spirit.One would have said that he made the immense edifice breathe. He waseverywhere about it; in fact, he multiplied himself on all points of thestructure. Now one perceived with affright at the very top of one ofthe towers, a fantastic dwarf climbing, writhing, crawling on allfours, descending outside above the abyss, leaping from projection toprojection, and going to ransack the belly of some sculptured gorgon; itwas Quasimodo dislodging the crows. Again, in some obscure corner of thechurch one came in contact with a sort of living chimera, crouchingand scowling; it was Quasimodo engaged in thought. Sometimes one caughtsight, upon a bell tower, of an enormous head and a bundle of disorderedlimbs swinging furiously at the end of a rope; it was Quasimodo ringingvespers or the Angelus. Often at night a hideous form was seen wanderingalong the frail balustrade of carved lacework, which crowns the towersand borders the circumference of the apse; again it was the hunchback ofNotreDame. Then, said the women of the neighborhood, the whole churchtook on something fantastic, supernatural, horrible; eyes and mouthswere opened, here and there; one heard the dogs, the monsters, and thegargoyles of stone, which keep watch night and day, with outstretchedneck and open jaws, around the monstrous cathedral, barking. And, ifit was a Christmas Eve, while the great bell, which seemed to emit thedeath rattle, summoned the faithful to the midnight mass, such an airwas spread over the sombre façade that one would have declared thatthe grand portal was devouring the throng, and that the rose window waswatching it. And all this came from Quasimodo. Egypt would have takenhim for the god of this temple; the Middle Ages believed him to be itsdemon: he was in fact its soul.To such an extent was this disease that for those who know thatQuasimodo has existed, NotreDame is today deserted, inanimate, dead.One feels that something has disappeared from it. That immense body isempty; it is a skeleton; the spirit has quitted it, one sees its placeand that is all. It is like a skull which still has holes for the eyes,but no longer sight.CHAPTER IV. THE DOG AND HIS MASTER.Nevertheless, there was one human creature whom Quasimodo excepted fromhis malice and from his hatred for others, and whom he loved even more,perhaps, than his cathedral: this was Claude Frollo.The matter was simple; Claude Frollo had taken him in, had adopted him,had nourished him, had reared him. When a little lad, it was betweenClaude Frollo legs that he was accustomed to seek refuge, when thedogs and the children barked after him. Claude Frollo had taught himto talk, to read, to write. Claude Frollo had finally made him thebellringer. Now, to give the big bell in marriage to Quasimodo was togive Juliet to Romeo.Hence Quasimodo gratitude was profound, passionate, boundless; andalthough the visage of his adopted father was often clouded or severe,although his speech was habitually curt, harsh, imperious, thatgratitude never wavered for a single moment. The archdeacon had inQuasimodo the most submissive slave, the most docile lackey, the mostvigilant of dogs. When the poor bellringer became deaf, there hadbeen established between him and Claude Frollo, a language of signs,mysterious and understood by themselves alone. In this manner thearchdeacon was the sole human being with whom Quasimodo had preservedcommunication. He was in sympathy with but two things in this world:NotreDame and Claude Frollo.There is nothing which can be compared with the empire of the archdeaconover the bellringer; with the attachment of the bellringer for thearchdeacon. A sign from Claude and the idea of giving him pleasure wouldhave sufficed to make Quasimodo hurl himself headlong from the summit ofNotreDame. It was a remarkable thingall that physical strength whichhad reached in Quasimodo such an extraordinary development, and whichwas placed by him blindly at the disposition of another. There was init, no doubt, filial devotion, domestic attachment; there was also thefascination of one spirit by another spirit. It was a poor, awkward, andclumsy organization, which stood with lowered head and supplicating eyesbefore a lofty and profound, a powerful and superior intellect. Lastly,and above all, it was gratitude. Gratitude so pushed to its extremestlimit, that we do not know to what to compare it. This virtue is not oneof those of which the finest examples are to be met with among men. Wewill say then, that Quasimodo loved the archdeacon as never a dog, nevera horse, never an elephant loved his master.CHAPTER V. MORE ABOUT CLAUDE FROLLO.In 1482, Quasimodo was about twenty years of age; Claude Frollo, aboutthirtysix. One had grown up, the other had grown old.Claude Frollo was no longer the simple scholar of the college of Torch,the tender protector of a little child, the young and dreamy philosopherwho knew many things and was ignorant of many. He was a priest, austere,grave, morose; one charged with souls; monsieur the archdeacon of Josas,the bishop second acolyte, having charge of the two deaneries ofMontlhéry, and Châteaufort, and one hundred and seventyfour countrycuracies. He was an imposing and sombre personage, before whom the choirboys in alb and in jacket trembled, as well as the machicots, and thebrothers of SaintAugustine and the matutinal clerks of NotreDame,when he passed slowly beneath the lofty arches of the choir, majestic,thoughtful, with arms folded and his head so bent upon his breast thatall one saw of his face was his large, bald brow.    An official of NotreDame, lower than a beneficed clergyman,higher than simple paid chanters.Dom Claude Frollo had, however, abandoned neither science nor theeducation of his young brother, those two occupations of his life. Butas time went on, some bitterness had been mingled with these thingswhich were so sweet. In the long run, says Paul Diacre, the best lardturns rancid. Little Jehan Frollo, surnamed (_du Moulin_) of the Mill because of the place where he had been reared, had not grown up in thedirection which Claude would have liked to impose upon him. The bigbrother counted upon a pious, docile, learned, and honorable pupil. Butthe little brother, like those young trees which deceive the gardenerhopes and turn obstinately to the quarter whence they receive sun andair, the little brother did not grow and did not multiply, but onlyput forth fine bushy and luxuriant branches on the side of laziness,ignorance, and debauchery. He was a regular devil, and a very disorderlyone, who made Dom Claude scowl; but very droll and very subtle, whichmade the big brother smile.Claude had confided him to that same college of Torchi where he hadpassed his early years in study and meditation; and it was a grief tohim that this sanctuary, formerly edified by the name of Frollo, shouldtoday be scandalized by it. He sometimes preached Jehan very long andsevere sermons, which the latter intrepidly endured. After all, theyoung scapegrace had a good heart, as can be seen in all comedies.But the sermon over, he none the less tranquilly resumed his course ofseditions and enormities. Now it was a _bejaune_ or yellow beak (as theycalled the new arrivals at the university), whom he had been mauling byway of welcome; a precious tradition which has been carefully preservedto our own day. Again, he had set in movement a band of scholars,who had flung themselves upon a wineshop in classic fashion, quasi_classico excitati_, had then beaten the tavernkeeper with offensivecudgels, and joyously pillaged the tavern, even to smashing in thehogsheads of wine in the cellar. And then it was a fine report in Latin,which the submonitor of Torchi carried piteously to Dom Claude withthis dolorous marginal comment,_Rixa; prima causa vinum optimumpotatum_. Finally, it was said, a thing quite horrible in a boy ofsixteen, that his debauchery often extended as far as the Rue deGlatigny.Claude, saddened and discouraged in his human affections, by all this,had flung himself eagerly into the arms of learning, that sister which,at least does not laugh in your face, and which always pays you, thoughin money that is sometimes a little hollow, for the attention which youhave paid to her. Hence, he became more and more learned, and, at thesame time, as a natural consequence, more and more rigid as apriest, more and more sad as a man. There are for each of us severalparallelisms between our intelligence, our habits, and our character,which develop without a break, and break only in the great disturbancesof life.As Claude Frollo had passed through nearly the entire circle of humanlearningpositive, exterior, and permissiblesince his youth, hewas obliged, unless he came to a halt, _ubi defuit orbis_, to proceedfurther and seek other aliments for the insatiable activity of hisintelligence. The antique symbol of the serpent biting its tail is,above all, applicable to science. It would appear that Claude Frollo hadexperienced this. Many grave persons affirm that, after having exhaustedthe _fas_ of human learning, he had dared to penetrate into the _nefas_.He had, they said, tasted in succession all the apples of the tree ofknowledge, and, whether from hunger or disgust, had ended by tastingthe forbidden fruit. He had taken his place by turns, as the readerhas seen, in the conferences of the theologians in Sorbonne,in theassemblies of the doctors of art, after the manner of SaintHilaire,inthe disputes of the decretalists, after the manner of SaintMartin,inthe congregations of physicians at the holy water font of NotreDame,_ad cupam NostroeDominoe_. All the dishes permitted and approved, whichthose four great kitchens called the four faculties could elaborate andserve to the understanding, he had devoured, and had been satiated withthem before his hunger was appeased. Then he had penetrated further,lower, beneath all that finished, material, limited knowledge; he had,perhaps, risked his soul, and had seated himself in the cavern atthat mysterious table of the alchemists, of the astrologers, of thehermetics, of which Averroès, Gillaume de Paris, and Nicolas Flamel holdthe end in the Middle Ages; and which extends in the East, by thelight of the sevenbranched candlestick, to Solomon, Pythagoras, andZoroaster.That is, at least, what was supposed, whether rightly or not. Itis certain that the archdeacon often visited the cemetery of theSaintsInnocents, where, it is true, his father and mother had beenburied, with other victims of the plague of 1466; but that he appearedfar less devout before the cross of their grave than before the strangefigures with which the tomb of Nicolas Flamel and Claude Pernelle,erected just beside it, was loaded.It is certain that he had frequently been seen to pass along the Rue desLombards, and furtively enter a little house which formed the cornerof the Rue des Ecrivans and the Rue Marivault. It was the house whichNicolas Flamel had built, where he had died about 1417, and which,constantly deserted since that time, had already begun to fall inruins,so greatly had the hermetics and the alchemists of all countrieswasted away the walls, merely by carving their names upon them. Someneighbors even affirm that they had once seen, through an airhole,Archdeacon Claude excavating, turning over, digging up the earth in thetwo cellars, whose supports had been daubed with numberless couplets andhieroglyphics by Nicolas Flamel himself. It was supposed that Flamel hadburied the philosopher stone in the cellar; and the alchemists, forthe space of two centuries, from Magistri to Father Pacifique, neverceased to worry the soil until the house, so cruelly ransacked andturned over, ended by falling into dust beneath their feet.Again, it is certain that the archdeacon had been seized with a singularpassion for the symbolical door of NotreDame, that page of a conjuringbook written in stone, by Bishop Guillaume de Paris, who has, no doubt,been damned for having affixed so infernal a frontispiece to the sacredpoem chanted by the rest of the edifice. Archdeacon Claude had thecredit also of having fathomed the mystery of the colossus of SaintChristopher, and of that lofty, enigmatical statue which then stood atthe entrance of the vestibule, and which the people, in derision,called Monsieur Legris. But, what every one might have noticed was theinterminable hours which he often employed, seated upon the parapet ofthe area in front of the church, in contemplating the sculptures of thefront; examining now the foolish virgins with their lamps reversed, nowthe wise virgins with their lamps upright; again, calculating the angleof vision of that raven which belongs to the left front, and which islooking at a mysterious point inside the church, where is concealed thephilosopher stone, if it be not in the cellar of Nicolas Flamel.It was, let us remark in passing, a singular fate for the Church ofNotreDame at that epoch to be so beloved, in two different degrees,and with so much devotion, by two beings so dissimilar as Claude andQuasimodo. Beloved by one, a sort of instinctive and savage halfman,for its beauty, for its stature, for the harmonies which emanated fromits magnificent ensemble; beloved by the other, a learned and passionateimagination, for its myth, for the sense which it contains, for thesymbolism scattered beneath the sculptures of its front,like the firsttext underneath the second in a palimpsest,in a word, for the enigmawhich it is eternally propounding to the understanding.Furthermore, it is certain that the archdeacon had established himselfin that one of the two towers which looks upon the Grève, just besidethe frame for the bells, a very secret little cell, into which no one,not even the bishop, entered without his leave, it was said. This tinycell had formerly been made almost at the summit of the tower, among theravens’ nests, by Bishop Hugo de Besançon who had wrought sorcery therein his day. What that cell contained, no one knew; but from the strandof the Terrain, at night, there was often seen to appear, disappear,and reappear at brief and regular intervals, at a little dormer windowopening upon the back of the tower, a certain red, intermittent,singular light which seemed to follow the panting breaths of a bellows,and to proceed from a flame, rather than from a light. In the darkness,at that height, it produced a singular effect; and the goodwives said:There the archdeacon blowing! hell is sparkling up yonder!    Hugo II. de Bisuncio, 13261332.There were no great proofs of sorcery in that, after all, but there wasstill enough smoke to warrant a surmise of fire, and the archdeacon borea tolerably formidable reputation. We ought to mention however, that thesciences of Egypt, that necromancy and magic, even the whitest, even themost innocent, had no more envenomed enemy, no more pitiless denunciatorbefore the gentlemen of the officialty of NotreDame. Whether thiswas sincere horror, or the game played by the thief who shouts, stopthief! at all events, it did not prevent the archdeacon from beingconsidered by the learned heads of the chapter, as a soul who hadventured into the vestibule of hell, who was lost in the caves of thecabal, groping amid the shadows of the occult sciences. Neither werethe people deceived thereby; with any one who possessed any sagacity,Quasimodo passed for the demon; Claude Frollo, for the sorcerer. Itwas evident that the bellringer was to serve the archdeacon for a giventime, at the end of which he would carry away the latter soul, by wayof payment. Thus the archdeacon, in spite of the excessive austerity ofhis life, was in bad odor among all pious souls; and there was no devoutnose so inexperienced that it could not smell him out to be a magician.And if, as he grew older, abysses had formed in his science, they hadalso formed in his heart. That at least, is what one had grounds forbelieving on scrutinizing that face upon which the soul was only seento shine through a sombre cloud. Whence that large, bald brow? that headforever bent? that breast always heaving with sighs? What secret thoughtcaused his mouth to smile with so much bitterness, at the same momentthat his scowling brows approached each other like two bulls on thepoint of fighting? Why was what hair he had left already gray? What wasthat internal fire which sometimes broke forth in his glance, to such adegree that his eye resembled a hole pierced in the wall of a furnace?These symptoms of a violent moral preoccupation, had acquired anespecially high degree of intensity at the epoch when this story takesplace. More than once a choirboy had fled in terror at finding himalone in the church, so strange and dazzling was his look. More thanonce, in the choir, at the hour of the offices, his neighbor in thestalls had heard him mingle with the plain song, _ad omnem tonum_,unintelligible parentheses. More than once the laundress of the Terraincharged with washing the chapter had observed, not without affright,the marks of nails and clenched fingers on the surplice of monsieur thearchdeacon of Josas.However, he redoubled his severity, and had never been more exemplary.By profession as well as by character, he had always held himself alooffrom women; he seemed to hate them more than ever. The mere rustlingof a silken petticoat caused his hood to fall over his eyes. Upon thisscore he was so jealous of austerity and reserve, that when the Dame deBeaujeu, the king daughter, came to visit the cloister of NotreDame,in the month of December, 1481, he gravely opposed her entrance,reminding the bishop of the statute of the Black Book, dating from thevigil of SaintBarthélemy, 1334, which interdicts access to the cloisterto any woman whatever, old or young, mistress or maid. Upon which thebishop had been constrained to recite to him the ordinance of LegateOdo, which excepts certain great dames, _aliquæ magnates mulieres,quæ sine scandalo vitari non possunt_. And again the archdeacon hadprotested, objecting that the ordinance of the legate, which dated backto 1207, was anterior by a hundred and twentyseven years to the BlackBook, and consequently was abrogated in fact by it. And he had refusedto appear before the princess.It was also noticed that his horror for Bohemian women and gypsies hadseemed to redouble for some time past. He had petitioned the bishop foran edict which expressly forbade the Bohemian women to come and danceand beat their tambourines on the place of the Parvis; and for about thesame length of time, he had been ransacking the mouldy placards ofthe officialty, in order to collect the cases of sorcerers and witchescondemned to fire or the rope, for complicity in crimes with rams, sows,or goats.CHAPTER VI. UNPOPULARITY.The archdeacon and the bellringer, as we have already said, were butlittle loved by the populace great and small, in the vicinity of thecathedral. When Claude and Quasimodo went out together, which frequentlyhappened, and when they were seen traversing in company, the valetbehind the master, the cold, narrow, and gloomy streets of the block ofNotreDame, more than one evil word, more than one ironical quaver, morethan one insulting jest greeted them on their way, unless Claude Frollo,which was rarely the case, walked with head upright and raised, showinghis severe and almost august brow to the dumbfounded jeerers.Both were in their quarter like the poets of whom Régnier speaks,  All sorts of persons run after poets,  As warblers fly shrieking after owls.Sometimes a mischievous child risked his skin and bones for theineffable pleasure of driving a pin into Quasimodo hump. Again, ayoung girl, more bold and saucy than was fitting, brushed the priestblack robe, singing in his face the sardonic ditty, niche, niche, thedevil is caught. Sometimes a group of squalid old crones, squatting ina file under the shadow of the steps to a porch, scolded noisily as thearchdeacon and the bellringer passed, and tossed them this encouragingwelcome, with a curse: Hum! there a fellow whose soul is made likethe other one body! Or a band of schoolboys and street urchins,playing hopscotch, rose in a body and saluted him classically, withsome cry in Latin: _Eia! eia! Claudius cum claudo_!But the insult generally passed unnoticed both by the priest and thebellringer. Quasimodo was too deaf to hear all these gracious things,and Claude was too dreamy.BOOK FIFTH.CHAPTER I. _ABBAS BEATI MARTINI_.Dom Claude fame had spread far and wide. It procured for him, at aboutthe epoch when he refused to see Madame de Beaujeu, a visit which helong remembered.It was in the evening. He had just retired, after the office, tohis canon cell in the cloister of NotreDame. This cell, with theexception, possibly, of some glass phials, relegated to a corner, andfilled with a decidedly equivocal powder, which strongly resembledthe alchemist powder of projection, presented nothing strange ormysterious. There were, indeed, here and there, some inscriptions onthe walls, but they were pure sentences of learning and piety, extractedfrom good authors. The archdeacon had just seated himself, by thelight of a threejetted copper lamp, before a vast coffer crammed withmanuscripts. He had rested his elbow upon the open volume of _Honoriusd’Autun_, _De predestinatione et libero arbitrio_, and he was turningover, in deep meditation, the leaves of a printed folio which he hadjust brought, the sole product of the press which his cell contained. Inthe midst of his revery there came a knock at his door. Who there? cried the learned man, in the gracious tone of a famished dog, disturbedover his bone.A voice without replied, Your friend, Jacques Coictier. He went toopen the door.It was, in fact, the king physician; a person about fifty years ofage, whose harsh physiognomy was modified only by a crafty eye. Anotherman accompanied him. Both wore long slatecolored robes, furred withminever, girded and closed, with caps of the same stuff and hue. Theirhands were concealed by their sleeves, their feet by their robes, theireyes by their caps.God help me, messieurs! said the archdeacon, showing them in; Iwas not expecting distinguished visitors at such an hour. And whilespeaking in this courteous fashion he cast an uneasy and scrutinizingglance from the physician to his companion.Tis never too late to come and pay a visit to so considerablea learned man as Dom Claude Frollo de Tirechappe, replied DoctorCoictier, whose FrancheComté accent made all his phrases drag alongwith the majesty of a trainrobe.There then ensued between the physician and the archdeacon one of thosecongratulatory prologues which, in accordance with custom, at thatepoch preceded all conversations between learned men, and which did notprevent them from detesting each other in the most cordial manner inthe world. However, it is the same nowadays; every wise man mouthcomplimenting another wise man is a vase of honeyed gall.Claude Frollo felicitations to Jacques Coictier bore referenceprincipally to the temporal advantages which the worthy physician hadfound means to extract, in the course of his much envied career, fromeach malady of the king, an operation of alchemy much better and morecertain than the pursuit of the philosopher stone.In truth, Monsieur le Docteur Coictier, I felt great joy on learning ofthe bishopric given your nephew, my reverend seigneur Pierre Verse. Ishe not Bishop of Amiens?Yes, monsieur Archdeacon; it is a grace and mercy of God.Do you know that you made a great figure on Christmas Day at the beadof your company of the chamber of accounts, Monsieur President?VicePresident, Dom Claude. Alas! nothing more.How is your superb house in the Rue SaintAndré des Arcs coming on?Tis a Louvre. I love greatly the apricot tree which is carved on thedoor, with this play of words: A L’ABRICOTIERSheltered from reefs.’Alas! Master Claude, all that masonry costeth me dear. In proportion asthe house is erected, I am ruined.Ho! have you not your revenues from the jail, and the bailiwick of thePalais, and the rents of all the houses, sheds, stalls, and booths ofthe enclosure? Tis a fine breast to suck.My castellany of Poissy has brought me in nothing this year.But your tolls of Triel, of SaintJames, of SaintGermainenLaye arealways good.Six score livres, and not even Parisian livres at that.You have your office of counsellor to the king. That is fixed.Yes, brother Claude; but that accursed seigneury of Poligny, whichpeople make so much noise about, is worth not sixty gold crowns, yearout and year in.In the compliments which Dom Claude addressed to Jacques Coictier, therewas that sardonical, biting, and covertly mocking accent, and the sadcruel smile of a superior and unhappy man who toys for a moment, by wayof distraction, with the dense prosperity of a vulgar man. The other didnot perceive it.Upon my soul, said Claude at length, pressing his hand, I am glad tosee you and in such good health.Thanks, Master Claude.By the way, exclaimed Dom Claude, how is your royal patient?He payeth not sufficiently his physician, replied the doctor, castinga side glance at his companion.Think you so, Gossip Coictier, said the latter.These words, uttered in a tone of surprise and reproach, drew upon thisunknown personage the attention of the archdeacon which, to tell thetruth, had not been diverted from him a single moment since the strangerhad set foot across the threshold of his cell. It had even required allthe thousand reasons which he had for handling tenderly Doctor JacquesCoictier, the allpowerful physician of King Louis XI., to induce himto receive the latter thus accompanied. Hence, there was nothing verycordial in his manner when Jacques Coictier said to him,By the way, Dom Claude, I bring you a colleague who has desired to seeyou on account of your reputation.Monsieur belongs to science? asked the archdeacon, fixing his piercingeye upon Coictier companion. He found beneath the brows of thestranger a glance no less piercing or less distrustful than his own.He was, so far as the feeble light of the lamp permitted one to judge,an old man about sixty years of age and of medium stature, who appearedsomewhat sickly and broken in health. His profile, although of a veryordinary outline, had something powerful and severe about it; his eyessparkled beneath a very deep superciliary arch, like a light in thedepths of a cave; and beneath his cap which was well drawn down and fellupon his nose, one recognized the broad expanse of a brow of genius.He took it upon himself to reply to the archdeacon question,Reverend master, he said in a grave tone, your renown has reached myears, and I wish to consult you. I am but a poor provincial gentleman,who removeth his shoes before entering the dwellings of the learned. Youmust know my name. I am called Gossip Tourangeau.Strange name for a gentleman, said the archdeacon to himself.Nevertheless, he had a feeling that he was in the presence of a strongand earnest character. The instinct of his own lofty intellect made himrecognize an intellect no less lofty under Gossip Tourangeau furredcap, and as he gazed at the solemn face, the ironical smile whichJacques Coictier presence called forth on his gloomy face, graduallydisappeared as twilight fades on the horizon of night. Stern and silent,he had resumed his seat in his great armchair; his elbow rested asusual, on the table, and his brow on his hand. After a few momentsof reflection, he motioned his visitors to be seated, and, turning toGossip Tourangeau he said,You come to consult me, master, and upon what science?Your reverence, replied Tourangeau, I am ill, very ill. You are saidto be great AEsculapius, and I am come to ask your advice in medicine.Medicine! said the archdeacon, tossing his head. He seemed to meditatefor a moment, and then resumed: Gossip Tourangeau, since that is yourname, turn your head, you will find my reply already written on thewall.Gossip Tourangeau obeyed, and read this inscription engraved above hishead: Medicine is the daughter of dreams.JAMBLIQUE.Meanwhile, Doctor Jacques Coictier had heard his companion questionwith a displeasure which Dom Claude response had but redoubled. Hebent down to the ear of Gossip Tourangeau, and said to him, softlyenough not to be heard by the archdeacon: I warned you that he was mad.You insisted on seeing him.Tis very possible that he is right, madman as he is, Doctor Jacques, replied his comrade in the same low tone, and with a bitter smile.As you please, replied Coictier dryly. Then, addressing thearchdeacon: You are clever at your trade, Dom Claude, and you are nomore at a loss over Hippocrates than a monkey is over a nut. Medicinea dream! I suspect that the pharmacopolists and the master physicianswould insist upon stoning you if they were here. So you deny theinfluence of philtres upon the blood, and unguents on the skin! You denythat eternal pharmacy of flowers and metals, which is called the world,made expressly for that eternal invalid called man!I deny, said Dom Claude coldly, neither pharmacy nor the invalid. Ireject the physician.Then it is not true, resumed Coictier hotly, that gout is an internaleruption; that a wound caused by artillery is to be cured by theapplication of a young mouse roasted; that young blood, properlyinjected, restores youth to aged veins; it is not true that two and twomake four, and that emprostathonos follows opistathonos.The archdeacon replied without perturbation: There are certain thingsof which I think in a certain fashion.Coictier became crimson with anger.There, there, my good Coictier, let us not get angry, said GossipTourangeau. Monsieur the archdeacon is our friend.Coictier calmed down, muttering in a low tone,After all, he mad._Pasquedieu_, Master Claude, resumed Gossip Tourangeau, after asilence, You embarrass me greatly. I had two things to consult youupon, one touching my health and the other touching my star.Monsieur, returned the archdeacon, if that be your motive, youwould have done as well not to put yourself out of breath climbing mystaircase. I do not believe in Medicine. I do not believe in Astrology.Indeed! said the man, with surprise.Coictier gave a forced laugh.You see that he is mad, he said, in a low tone, to Gossip Tourangeau.He does not believe in astrology.The idea of imagining, pursued Dom Claude, that every ray of a staris a thread which is fastened to the head of a man!And what then, do you believe in? exclaimed Gossip Tourangeau.The archdeacon hesitated for a moment, then he allowed a gloomy smile toescape, which seemed to give the lie to his response: _Credo in Deum_._Dominum nostrum_, added Gossip Tourangeau, making the sign of thecross.Amen, said Coictier.Reverend master, resumed Tourangeau, I am charmed in soul to see youin such a religious frame of mind. But have you reached the point, greatsavant as you are, of no longer believing in science?No, said the archdeacon, grasping the arm of Gossip Tourangeau, anda ray of enthusiasm lighted up his gloomy eyes, no, I do not rejectscience. I have not crawled so long, flat on my belly, with my nails inthe earth, through the innumerable ramifications of its caverns, withoutperceiving far in front of me, at the end of the obscure gallery, alight, a flame, a something, the reflection, no doubt, of the dazzlingcentral laboratory where the patient and the wise have found out God.And in short, interrupted Tourangeau, what do you hold to be true andcertain?Alchemy.Coictier exclaimed, Pardieu, Dom Claude, alchemy has its use, no doubt,but why blaspheme medicine and astrology?Naught is your science of man, naught is your science of the stars, said the archdeacon, commandingly.That driving Epidaurus and Chaldea very fast, replied the physicianwith a grin.Listen, Messire Jacques. This is said in good faith. I am not theking physician, and his majesty has not given me the Garden ofDaedalus in which to observe the constellations. Don’t get angry, butlisten to me. What truth have you deduced, I will not say from medicine,which is too foolish a thing, but from astrology? Cite to me the virtuesof the vertical boustrophedon, the treasures of the number ziruph andthose of the number zephirod!Will you deny, said Coictier, the sympathetic force of the collarbone, and the cabalistics which are derived from it?An error, Messire Jacques! None of your formulas end in reality.Alchemy on the other hand has its discoveries. Will you contest resultslike this? Ice confined beneath the earth for a thousand years istransformed into rock crystals. Lead is the ancestor of all metals. Forgold is not a metal, gold is light. Lead requires only four periods oftwo hundred years each, to pass in succession from the state of lead, tothe state of red arsenic, from red arsenic to tin, from tin to silver.Are not these facts? But to believe in the collar bone, in the full lineand in the stars, is as ridiculous as to believe with the inhabitants ofGrandCathay that the golden oriole turns into a mole, and that grainsof wheat turn into fish of the carp species.I have studied hermetic science! exclaimed Coictier, and I affirmThe fiery archdeacon did not allow him to finish: And I have studiedmedicine, astrology, and hermetics. Here alone is the truth. (As hespoke thus, he took from the top of the coffer a phial filled with thepowder which we have mentioned above), here alone is light! Hippocratesis a dream; Urania is a dream; Hermes, a thought. Gold is the sun; tomake gold is to be God. Herein lies the one and only science. I havesounded the depths of medicine and astrology, I tell you! Naught,nothingness! The human body, shadows! the planets, shadows!And he fell back in his armchair in a commanding and inspired attitude.Gossip Touraugeau watched him in silence. Coictier tried to grin,shrugged his shoulders imperceptibly, and repeated in a low voice,A madman!And, said Tourangeau suddenly, the wondrous result,have youattained it, have you made gold?If I had made it, replied the archdeacon, articulating his wordsslowly, like a man who is reflecting, the king of France would be namedClaude and not Louis.The stranger frowned.What am I saying? resumed Dom Claude, with a smile of disdain. Whatwould the throne of France be to me when I could rebuild the empire ofthe Orient?Very good! said the stranger.Oh, the poor fool! murmured Coictier.The archdeacon went on, appearing to reply now only to his thoughts,But no, I am still crawling; I am scratching my face and knees againstthe pebbles of the subterranean pathway. I catch a glimpse, I do notcontemplate! I do not read, I spell out!And when you know how to read! demanded the stranger, will you makegold?Who doubts it? said the archdeacon.In that case Our Lady knows that I am greatly in need of money, and Ishould much desire to read in your books. Tell me, reverend master, isyour science inimical or displeasing to Our Lady?Whose archdeacon I am? Dom Claude contented himself with replying,with tranquil hauteur.That is true, my master. Well! will it please you to initiate me? Letme spell with you.Claude assumed the majestic and pontifical attitude of a Samuel.Old man, it requires longer years than remain to you, to undertake thisvoyage across mysterious things. Your head is very gray! One comes forthfrom the cavern only with white hair, but only those with dark hairenter it. Science alone knows well how to hollow, wither, and dry uphuman faces; she needs not to have old age bring her faces alreadyfurrowed. Nevertheless, if the desire possesses you of putting yourselfunder discipline at your age, and of deciphering the formidable alphabetof the sages, come to me; tis well, I will make the effort. I will nottell you, poor old man, to go and visit the sepulchral chambers of thepyramids, of which ancient Herodotus speaks, nor the brick tower ofBabylon, nor the immense white marble sanctuary of the Indian temple ofEklinga. I, no more than yourself, have seen the Chaldean masonry worksconstructed according to the sacred form of the Sikra, nor the temple ofSolomon, which is destroyed, nor the stone doors of the sepulchre of thekings of Israel, which are broken. We will content ourselves with thefragments of the book of Hermes which we have here. I will explain toyou the statue of Saint Christopher, the symbol of the sower, and thatof the two angels which are on the front of the SainteChapelle, and oneof which holds in his hands a vase, the other, a cloudHere Jacques Coictier, who had been unhorsed by the archdeaconimpetuous replies, regained his saddle, and interrupted him with thetriumphant tone of one learned man correcting another,_Erras amiceClaudi_. The symbol is not the number. You take Orpheus for Hermes.Tis you who are in error, replied the archdeacon, gravely. Daedalusis the base; Orpheus is the wall; Hermes is the edifice,that is all.You shall come when you will, he continued, turning to Tourangeau, Iwill show you the little parcels of gold which remained at the bottom ofNicholas Flamel alembic, and you shall compare them with the gold ofGuillaume de Paris. I will teach you the secret virtues of the Greekword, _peristera_. But, first of all, I will make you read, one afterthe other, the marble letters of the alphabet, the granite pages of thebook. We shall go to the portal of Bishop Guillaume and of SaintJean leRond at the SainteChapelle, then to the house of Nicholas Flamel, RueManvault, to his tomb, which is at the SaintsInnocents, to his twohospitals, Rue de Montmorency. I will make you read the hieroglyphicswhich cover the four great iron cramps on the portal of the hospitalSaintGervais, and of the Rue de la Ferronnerie. We willspell out in company, also, the façade of SaintCome, ofSainteGenevièvedesArdents, of Saint Martin, of SaintJacquesde la Boucherie.For a long time, Gossip Tourangeau, intelligent as was his glance, hadappeared not to understand Dom Claude. He interrupted._Pasquedieu_! what are your books, then?Here is one of them, said the archdeacon.And opening the window of his cell he pointed out with his finger theimmense church of NotreDame, which, outlining against the starry skythe black silhouette of its two towers, its stone flanks, its monstroushaunches, seemed an enormous twoheaded sphinx, seated in the middle ofthe city.The archdeacon gazed at the gigantic edifice for some time in silence,then extending his right hand, with a sigh, towards the printed bookwhich lay open on the table, and his left towards NotreDame, andturning a sad glance from the book to the church,Alas, he said,this will kill that.Coictier, who had eagerly approached the book, could not repress anexclamation. Hé, but now, what is there so formidable in this: GLOSSAIN EPISTOLAS D. PAULI, _Norimbergoe, Antonius Koburger_, 1474.’ This isnot new. Tis a book of Pierre Lombard, the Master of Sentences. Is itbecause it is printed?You have said it, replied Claude, who seemed absorbed in a profoundmeditation, and stood resting, his forefinger bent backward on the foliowhich had come from the famous press of Nuremberg. Then he added thesemysterious words: Alas! alas! small things come at the end of greatthings; a tooth triumphs over a mass. The Nile rat kills the crocodile,the swordfish kills the whale, the book will kill the edifice.The curfew of the cloister sounded at the moment when Master Jacqueswas repeating to his companion in low tones, his eternal refrain, He ismad! To which his companion this time replied, I believe that he is.It was the hour when no stranger could remain in the cloister. The twovisitors withdrew. Master, said Gossip Tourangeau, as he took leaveof the archdeacon, I love wise men and great minds, and I hold youin singular esteem. Come tomorrow to the Palace des Tournelles, andinquire for the Abbé de SainteMartin, of Tours.The archdeacon returned to his chamber dumbfounded, comprehendingat last who Gossip Tourangeau was, and recalling that passage of theregister of SainteMartin, of Tours:_Abbas beati Martini, SCILICET REXFRANCIAE, est canonicus de consuetudine et habet parvam proebendam quamhabet sanctus Venantius, et debet sedere in sede thesaurarii_.It is asserted that after that epoch the archdeacon had frequentconferences with Louis XI., when his majesty came to Paris, and thatDom Claude influence quite overshadowed that of Olivier le Daim andJacques Coictier, who, as was his habit, rudely took the king to task onthat account.CHAPTER II. THIS WILL KILL THAT.Our lady readers will pardon us if we pause for a moment to seek whatcould have been the thought concealed beneath those enigmatic words ofthe archdeacon: This will kill that. The book will kill the edifice.To our mind, this thought had two faces. In the first place, it was apriestly thought. It was the affright of the priest in the presence ofa new agent, the printing press. It was the terror and dazzled amazementof the men of the sanctuary, in the presence of the luminous press ofGutenberg. It was the pulpit and the manuscript taking the alarm at theprinted word: something similar to the stupor of a sparrow which shouldbehold the angel Legion unfold his six million wings. It was the cry ofthe prophet who already hears emancipated humanity roaring andswarming; who beholds in the future, intelligence sapping faith,opinion dethroning belief, the world shaking off Rome. It was theprognostication of the philosopher who sees human thought, volatilizedby the press, evaporating from the theocratic recipient. It was theterror of the soldier who examines the brazen battering ram, andsays:The tower will crumble. It signified that one power was aboutto succeed another power. It meant, The press will kill the church.But underlying this thought, the first and most simple one, no doubt,there was in our opinion another, newer one, a corollary of the first,less easy to perceive and more easy to contest, a view as philosophicaland belonging no longer to the priest alone but to the savant and theartist. It was a presentiment that human thought, in changing its form,was about to change its mode of expression; that the dominant idea ofeach generation would no longer be written with the same matter, and inthe same manner; that the book of stone, so solid and so durable, wasabout to make way for the book of paper, more solid and still moredurable. In this connection the archdeacon vague formula had a secondsense. It meant, Printing will kill architecture.In fact, from the origin of things down to the fifteenth century of theChristian era, inclusive, architecture is the great book of humanity,the principal expression of man in his different stages of development,either as a force or as an intelligence.When the memory of the first races felt itself overloaded, when the massof reminiscences of the human race became so heavy and so confused thatspeech naked and flying, ran the risk of losing them on the way, mentranscribed them on the soil in a manner which was at once the mostvisible, most durable, and most natural. They sealed each traditionbeneath a monument.The first monuments were simple masses of rock, which the iron had nottouched, as Moses says. Architecture began like all writing. It wasfirst an alphabet. Men planted a stone upright, it was a letter, andeach letter was a hieroglyph, and upon each hieroglyph rested a group ofideas, like the capital on the column. This is what the earliest racesdid everywhere, at the same moment, on the surface of the entire world.We find the standing stones of the Celts in Asian Siberia; in thepampas of America.Later on, they made words; they placed stone upon stone, they coupledthose syllables of granite, and attempted some combinations. The Celticdolmen and cromlech, the Etruscan tumulus, the Hebrew galgal, are words.Some, especially the tumulus, are proper names. Sometimes even, when menhad a great deal of stone, and a vast plain, they wrote a phrase. Theimmense pile of Karnac is a complete sentence.At last they made books. Traditions had brought forth symbols, beneathwhich they disappeared like the trunk of a tree beneath its foliage;all these symbols in which humanity placed faith continued to grow, tomultiply, to intersect, to become more and more complicated; the firstmonuments no longer sufficed to contain them, they were overflowingin every part; these monuments hardly expressed now the primitivetradition, simple like themselves, naked and prone upon the earth. Thesymbol felt the need of expansion in the edifice. Then architecture wasdeveloped in proportion with human thought; it became a giant witha thousand heads and a thousand arms, and fixed all this floatingsymbolism in an eternal, visible, palpable form. While Daedalus, who isforce, measured; while Orpheus, who is intelligence, sang;the pillar,which is a letter; the arcade, which is a syllable; the pyramid, whichis a word,all set in movement at once by a law of geometry and by alaw of poetry, grouped themselves, combined, amalgamated, descended,ascended, placed themselves side by side on the soil, ranged themselvesin stories in the sky, until they had written under the dictation ofthe general idea of an epoch, those marvellous books which were alsomarvellous edifices: the Pagoda of Eklinga, the Rhamseion of Egypt, theTemple of Solomon.The generating idea, the word, was not only at the foundation ofall these edifices, but also in the form. The temple of Solomon, forexample, was not alone the binding of the holy book; it was the holybook itself. On each one of its concentric walls, the priests could readthe word translated and manifested to the eye, and thus they followedits transformations from sanctuary to sanctuary, until they seized it inits last tabernacle, under its most concrete form, which still belongedto architecture: the arch. Thus the word was enclosed in an edifice, butits image was upon its envelope, like the human form on the coffin of amummy.And not only the form of edifices, but the sites selected for them,revealed the thought which they represented, according as the symbol tobe expressed was graceful or grave. Greece crowned her mountains witha temple harmonious to the eye; India disembowelled hers, to chiseltherein those monstrous subterranean pagodas, borne up by gigantic rowsof granite elephants.Thus, during the first six thousand years of the world, from themost immemorial pagoda of Hindustan, to the cathedral of Cologne,architecture was the great handwriting of the human race. And this is sotrue, that not only every religious symbol, but every human thought, hasits page and its monument in that immense book.All civilization begins in theocracy and ends in democracy. This law ofliberty following unity is written in architecture. For, let us insistupon this point, masonry must not be thought to be powerful only inerecting the temple and in expressing the myth and sacerdotal symbolism;in inscribing in hieroglyphs upon its pages of stone the mysterioustables of the law. If it were thus,as there comes in all human societya moment when the sacred symbol is worn out and becomes obliteratedunder freedom of thought, when man escapes from the priest, whenthe excrescence of philosophies and systems devour the face ofreligion,architecture could not reproduce this new state of humanthought; its leaves, so crowded on the face, would be empty on the back;its work would be mutilated; its book would be incomplete. But no.Let us take as an example the Middle Ages, where we see more clearlybecause it is nearer to us. During its first period, while theocracy isorganizing Europe, while the Vatican is rallying and reclassing aboutitself the elements of a Rome made from the Rome which lies in ruinsaround the Capitol, while Christianity is seeking all the stages ofsociety amid the rubbish of anterior civilization, and rebuilding withits ruins a new hierarchic universe, the keystone to whose vault is thepriestone first hears a dull echo from that chaos, and then, little bylittle, one sees, arising from beneath the breath of Christianity, frombeneath the hand of the barbarians, from the fragments of the dead Greekand Roman architectures, that mysterious Romanesque architecture, sisterof the theocratic masonry of Egypt and of India, inalterable emblem ofpure catholicism, unchangeable hieroglyph of the papal unity. All thethought of that day is written, in fact, in this sombre, Romanesquestyle. One feels everywhere in it authority, unity, the impenetrable,the absolute, Gregory VII.; always the priest, never the man; everywherecaste, never the people.But the Crusades arrive. They are a great popular movement, and everygreat popular movement, whatever may be its cause and object, alwayssets free the spirit of liberty from its final precipitate. Newthings spring into life every day. Here opens the stormy period of theJacqueries, Pragueries, and Leagues. Authority wavers, unity is divided.Feudalism demands to share with theocracy, while awaiting the inevitablearrival of the people, who will assume the part of the lion: _Quianominor leo_. Seignory pierces through sacerdotalism; the commonality,through seignory. The face of Europe is changed. Well! the face ofarchitecture is changed also. Like civilization, it has turned apage, and the new spirit of the time finds her ready to write at itsdictation. It returns from the crusades with the pointed arch, like thenations with liberty.Then, while Rome is undergoing gradual dismemberment, Romanesquearchitecture dies. The hieroglyph deserts the cathedral, and betakesitself to blazoning the donjon keep, in order to lend prestige tofeudalism. The cathedral itself, that edifice formerly so dogmatic,invaded henceforth by the bourgeoisie, by the community, by liberty,escapes the priest and falls into the power of the artist. The artistbuilds it after his own fashion. Farewell to mystery, myth, law. Fancyand caprice, welcome. Provided the priest has his basilica and hisaltar, he has nothing to say. The four walls belong to the artist. Thearchitectural book belongs no longer to the priest, to religion, toRome; it is the property of poetry, of imagination, of the people. Hencethe rapid and innumerable transformations of that architecture whichowns but three centuries, so striking after the stagnant immobility ofthe Romanesque architecture, which owns six or seven. Nevertheless,art marches on with giant strides. Popular genius amid originalityaccomplish the task which the bishops formerly fulfilled. Each racewrites its line upon the book, as it passes; it erases the ancientRomanesque hieroglyphs on the frontispieces of cathedrals, and at themost one only sees dogma cropping out here and there, beneath the newsymbol which it has deposited. The popular drapery hardly permits thereligious skeleton to be suspected. One cannot even form an idea of theliberties which the architects then take, even toward the Church. Thereare capitals knitted of nuns and monks, shamelessly coupled, as on thehall of chimney pieces in the Palais de Justice, in Paris. There isNoah adventure carved to the last detail, as under the great portalof Bourges. There is a bacchanalian monk, with ass ears and glass inhand, laughing in the face of a whole community, as on the lavatoryof the Abbey of Bocherville. There exists at that epoch, for thoughtwritten in stone, a privilege exactly comparable to our present libertyof the press. It is the liberty of architecture.This liberty goes very far. Sometimes a portal, a façade, an entirechurch, presents a symbolical sense absolutely foreign to worship, oreven hostile to the Church. In the thirteenth century, Guillaume deParis, and Nicholas Flamel, in the fifteenth, wrote such seditiouspages. SaintJacques de la Boucherie was a whole church of theopposition.Thought was then free only in this manner; hence it never wrote itselfout completely except on the books called edifices. Thought, under theform of edifice, could have beheld itself burned in the public squareby the hands of the executioner, in its manuscript form, if it had beensufficiently imprudent to risk itself thus; thought, as the door of achurch, would have been a spectator of the punishment of thought as abook. Having thus only this resource, masonry, in order to make its wayto the light, flung itself upon it from all quarters. Hence the immensequantity of cathedrals which have covered Europea number so prodigiousthat one can hardly believe it even after having verified it. Allthe material forces, all the intellectual forces of society convergedtowards the same point: architecture. In this manner, under the pretextof building churches to God, art was developed in its magnificentproportions.Then whoever was born a poet became an architect. Genius, scattered inthe masses, repressed in every quarter under feudalism as under a_testudo_ of brazen bucklers, finding no issue except in the directionof architecture,gushed forth through that art, and its Iliads assumedthe form of cathedrals. All other arts obeyed, and placed themselvesunder the discipline of architecture. They were the workmen of the greatwork. The architect, the poet, the master, summed up in his person thesculpture which carved his façades, painting which illuminated hiswindows, music which set his bells to pealing, and breathed into hisorgans. There was nothing down to poor poetry,properly speaking, thatwhich persisted in vegetating in manuscripts,which was not forced, inorder to make something of itself, to come and frame itself in theedifice in the shape of a hymn or of prose; the same part, after all,which the tragedies of AEschylus had played in the sacerdotal festivalsof Greece; Genesis, in the temple of Solomon.Thus, down to the time of Gutenberg, architecture is the principalwriting, the universal writing. In that granite book, begun by theOrient, continued by Greek and Roman antiquity, the Middle Ages wrotethe last page. Moreover, this phenomenon of an architecture of thepeople following an architecture of caste, which we have just beenobserving in the Middle Ages, is reproduced with every analogousmovement in the human intelligence at the other great epochs of history.Thus, in order to enunciate here only summarily, a law which it wouldrequire volumes to develop: in the high Orient, the cradle of primitivetimes, after Hindoo architecture came Phoenician architecture, thatopulent mother of Arabian architecture; in antiquity, after Egyptianarchitecture, of which Etruscan style and cyclopean monuments are butone variety, came Greek architecture (of which the Roman style is onlya continuation), surcharged with the Carthaginian dome; in moderntimes, after Romanesque architecture came Gothic architecture. And byseparating there three series into their component parts, we shall findin the three eldest sisters, Hindoo architecture, Egyptian architecture,Romanesque architecture, the same symbol; that is to say, theocracy,caste, unity, dogma, myth, God: and for the three younger sisters,Phoenician architecture, Greek architecture, Gothic architecture,whatever, nevertheless, may be the diversity of form inherent in theirnature, the same signification also; that is to say, liberty, thepeople, man.In the Hindu, Egyptian, or Romanesque architecture, one feels thepriest, nothing but the priest, whether he calls himself Brahmin,Magian, or Pope. It is not the same in the architectures of the people.They are richer and less sacred. In the Phoenician, one feels themerchant; in the Greek, the republican; in the Gothic, the citizen.The general characteristics of all theocratic architecture areimmutability, horror of progress, the preservation of traditional lines,the consecration of the primitive types, the constant bending of allthe forms of men and of nature to the incomprehensible caprices of thesymbol. These are dark books, which the initiated alone understand howto decipher. Moreover, every form, every deformity even, has therea sense which renders it inviolable. Do not ask of Hindoo, Egyptian,Romanesque masonry to reform their design, or to improve theirstatuary. Every attempt at perfecting is an impiety to them. In thesearchitectures it seems as though the rigidity of the dogma hadspread over the stone like a sort of second petrifaction. The generalcharacteristics of popular masonry, on the contrary, are progress,originality, opulence, perpetual movement. They are already sufficientlydetached from religion to think of their beauty, to take care of it, tocorrect without relaxation their parure of statues or arabesques. Theyare of the age. They have something human, which they mingle incessantlywith the divine symbol under which they still produce. Hence,edifices comprehensible to every soul, to every intelligence, to everyimagination, symbolical still, but as easy to understand as nature.Between theocratic architecture and this there is the differencethat lies between a sacred language and a vulgar language, betweenhieroglyphics and art, between Solomon and Phidias.If the reader will sum up what we have hitherto briefly, very briefly,indicated, neglecting a thousand proofs and also a thousand objectionsof detail, he will be led to this: that architecture was, down to thefifteenth century, the chief register of humanity; that in that intervalnot a thought which is in any degree complicated made its appearance inthe world, which has not been worked into an edifice; that every popularidea, and every religious law, has had its monumental records; thatthe human race has, in short, had no important thought which it has notwritten in stone. And why? Because every thought, either philosophicalor religious, is interested in perpetuating itself; because the ideawhich has moved one generation wishes to move others also, and leave atrace. Now, what a precarious immortality is that of the manuscript! Howmuch more solid, durable, unyielding, is a book of stone! In order todestroy the written word, a torch and a Turk are sufficient. To demolishthe constructed word, a social revolution, a terrestrial revolution arerequired. The barbarians passed over the Coliseum; the deluge, perhaps,passed over the Pyramids.In the fifteenth century everything changes.Human thought discovers a mode of perpetuating itself, not only moredurable and more resisting than architecture, but still more simple andeasy. Architecture is dethroned. Gutenberg letters of lead are aboutto supersede Orpheus letters of stone.  The book is about to kill the edifice.The invention of printing is the greatest event in history. It is themother of revolution. It is the mode of expression of humanity which istotally renewed; it is human thought stripping off one form and donninganother; it is the complete and definitive change of skin of thatsymbolical serpent which since the days of Adam has representedintelligence.In its printed form, thought is more imperishable than ever; it isvolatile, irresistible, indestructible. It is mingled with the air. Inthe days of architecture it made a mountain of itself, and took powerfulpossession of a century and a place. Now it converts itself into a flockof birds, scatters itself to the four winds, and occupies all points ofair and space at once.We repeat, who does not perceive that in this form it is far moreindelible? It was solid, it has become alive. It passes from durationin time to immortality. One can demolish a mass; how can one extirpateubiquity? If a flood comes, the mountains will have long disappearedbeneath the waves, while the birds will still be flying about; and if asingle ark floats on the surface of the cataclysm, they will alight uponit, will float with it, will be present with it at the ebbing of thewaters; and the new world which emerges from this chaos will behold, onits awakening, the thought of the world which has been submerged soaringabove it, winged and living.And when one observes that this mode of expression is not only the mostconservative, but also the most simple, the most convenient, the mostpracticable for all; when one reflects that it does not drag after itbulky baggage, and does not set in motion a heavy apparatus; when onecompares thought forced, in order to transform itself into an edifice,to put in motion four or five other arts and tons of gold, a wholemountain of stones, a whole forest of timberwork, a whole nation ofworkmen; when one compares it to the thought which becomes a book, andfor which a little paper, a little ink, and a pen suffice,how can onebe surprised that human intelligence should have quitted architecturefor printing? Cut the primitive bed of a river abruptly with a canalhollowed out below its level, and the river will desert its bed.Behold how, beginning with the discovery of printing, architecturewithers away little by little, becomes lifeless and bare. How one feelsthe water sinking, the sap departing, the thought of the times and ofthe people withdrawing from it! The chill is almost imperceptible inthe fifteenth century; the press is, as yet, too weak, and, at themost, draws from powerful architecture a superabundance of life.But practically beginning with the sixteenth century, the malady ofarchitecture is visible; it is no longer the expression of society; itbecomes classic art in a miserable manner; from being Gallic, European,indigenous, it becomes Greek and Roman; from being true and modern,it becomes pseudoclassic. It is this decadence which is called theRenaissance. A magnificent decadence, however, for the ancient Gothicgenius, that sun which sets behind the gigantic press of Mayence, stillpenetrates for a while longer with its rays that whole hybrid pile ofLatin arcades and Corinthian columns.It is that setting sun which we mistake for the dawn.Nevertheless, from the moment when architecture is no longer anythingbut an art like any other; as soon as it is no longer the total art, thesovereign art, the tyrant art,it has no longer the power to retainthe other arts. So they emancipate themselves, break the yoke of thearchitect, and take themselves off, each one in its own direction. Eachone of them gains by this divorce. Isolation aggrandizes everything.Sculpture becomes statuary, the image trade becomes painting, the canonbecomes music. One would pronounce it an empire dismembered at the deathof its Alexander, and whose provinces become kingdoms.Hence Raphael, Michael Angelo, Jean Goujon, Palestrina, those splendorsof the dazzling sixteenth century.Thought emancipates itself in all directions at the same time as thearts. The archheretics of the Middle Ages had already made largeincisions into Catholicism. The sixteenth century breaks religiousunity. Before the invention of printing, reform would have been merelya schism; printing converted it into a revolution. Take away the press;heresy is enervated. Whether it be Providence or Fate, Gutenburg is theprecursor of Luther.Nevertheless, when the sun of the Middle Ages is completely set, whenthe Gothic genius is forever extinct upon the horizon, architecturegrows dim, loses its color, becomes more and more effaced. The printedbook, the gnawing worm of the edifice, sucks and devours it. It becomesbare, denuded of its foliage, and grows visibly emaciated. It is petty,it is poor, it is nothing. It no longer expresses anything, not even thememory of the art of another time. Reduced to itself, abandoned by theother arts, because human thought is abandoning it, it summonsbunglers in place of artists. Glass replaces the painted windows. Thestonecutter succeeds the sculptor. Farewell all sap, all originality,all life, all intelligence. It drags along, a lamentable workshopmendicant, from copy to copy. Michael Angelo, who, no doubt, felt evenin the sixteenth century that it was dying, had a last idea, an idea ofdespair. That Titan of art piled the Pantheon on the Parthenon, and madeSaintPeter at Rome. A great work, which deserved to remain unique,the last originality of architecture, the signature of a giant artist atthe bottom of the colossal register of stone which was closed forever.With Michael Angelo dead, what does this miserable architecture, whichsurvived itself in the state of a spectre, do? It takes SaintPeterin Rome, copies it and parodies it. It is a mania. It is a pity. Eachcentury has its SaintPeter of Rome; in the seventeenth century, theValdeGrâce; in the eighteenth, SainteGeneviève. Each country has itsSaintPeter of Rome. London has one; Petersburg has another; Paris hastwo or three. The insignificant testament, the last dotage of a decrepitgrand art falling back into infancy before it dies.If, in place of the characteristic monuments which we have justdescribed, we examine the general aspect of art from the sixteenthto the eighteenth century, we notice the same phenomena of decay andphthisis. Beginning with François II., the architectural form of theedifice effaces itself more and more, and allows the geometrical form,like the bony structure of an emaciated invalid, to become prominent.The fine lines of art give way to the cold and inexorable lines ofgeometry. An edifice is no longer an edifice; it is a polyhedron.Meanwhile, architecture is tormented in her struggles to conceal thisnudity. Look at the Greek pediment inscribed upon the Roman pediment,and vice versa. It is still the Pantheon on the Parthenon: SaintPeterof Rome. Here are the brick houses of Henri IV., with their stonecorners; the Place Royale, the Place Dauphine. Here are the churchesof Louis XIII., heavy, squat, thickset, crowded together, loaded with adome like a hump. Here is the Mazarin architecture, the wretched Italianpasticcio of the Four Nations. Here are the palaces of Louis XIV., longbarracks for courtiers, stiff, cold, tiresome. Here, finally, is LouisXV., with chiccory leaves and vermicelli, and all the warts, and allthe fungi, which disfigure that decrepit, toothless, and coquettish oldarchitecture. From François II. to Louis XV., the evil has increased ingeometrical progression. Art has no longer anything but skin upon itsbones. It is miserably perishing.Meanwhile what becomes of printing? All the life which is leavingarchitecture comes to it. In proportion as architecture ebbs, printingswells and grows. That capital of forces which human thought had beenexpending in edifices, it henceforth expends in books. Thus, from thesixteenth century onward, the press, raised to the level of decayingarchitecture, contends with it and kills it. In the seventeenth centuryit is already sufficiently the sovereign, sufficiently triumphant,sufficiently established in its victory, to give to the world the feastof a great literary century. In the eighteenth, having reposed for along time at the Court of Louis XIV., it seizes again the old sword ofLuther, puts it into the hand of Voltaire, and rushes impetuously tothe attack of that ancient Europe, whose architectural expression it hasalready killed. At the moment when the eighteenth century comes toan end, it has destroyed everything. In the nineteenth, it begins toreconstruct.Now, we ask, which of the three arts has really represented humanthought for the last three centuries? which translates it? whichexpresses not only its literary and scholastic vagaries, but its vast,profound, universal movement? which constantly superposes itself,without a break, without a gap, upon the human race, which walks amonster with a thousand legs?Architecture or printing?It is printing. Let the reader make no mistake; architecture is dead;irretrievably slain by the printed book,slain because it endures fora shorter time,slain because it costs more. Every cathedral representsmillions. Let the reader now imagine what an investment of funds itwould require to rewrite the architectural book; to cause thousands ofedifices to swarm once more upon the soil; to return to those epochswhen the throng of monuments was such, according to the statement of aneye witness, that one would have said that the world in shaking itself,had cast off its old garments in order to cover itself with a whitevesture of churches. _Erat enim ut si mundus, ipse excutiendo semet,rejecta vetustate, candida ecclesiarum vestem indueret_. (GLABERRADOLPHUS.)A book is so soon made, costs so little, and can go so far! How can itsurprise us that all human thought flows in this channel? This does notmean that architecture will not still have a fine monument, an isolatedmasterpiece, here and there. We may still have from time to time, underthe reign of printing, a column made I suppose, by a whole army frommelted cannon, as we had under the reign of architecture, Iliads andRomanceros, Mahabâhrata, and Nibelungen Lieds, made by a whole people,with rhapsodies piled up and melted together. The great accident of anarchitect of genius may happen in the twentieth century, like that ofDante in the thirteenth. But architecture will no longer be the socialart, the collective art, the dominating art. The grand poem, the grandedifice, the grand work of humanity will no longer be built: it will beprinted.And henceforth, if architecture should arise again accidentally, it willno longer be mistress. It will be subservient to the law of literature,which formerly received the law from it. The respective positions of thetwo arts will be inverted. It is certain that in architectural epochs,the poems, rare it is true, resemble the monuments. In India, Vyasa isbranching, strange, impenetrable as a pagoda. In Egyptian Orient, poetryhas like the edifices, grandeur and tranquillity of line; in antiqueGreece, beauty, serenity, calm; in Christian Europe, the Catholicmajesty, the popular naivete, the rich and luxuriant vegetation ofan epoch of renewal. The Bible resembles the Pyramids; the Iliad, theParthenon; Homer, Phidias. Dante in the thirteenth century is thelast Romanesque church; Shakespeare in the sixteenth, the last Gothiccathedral.Thus, to sum up what we have hitherto said, in a fashion which isnecessarily incomplete and mutilated, the human race has two books, tworegisters, two testaments: masonry and printing; the Bible of stone andthe Bible of paper. No doubt, when one contemplates these two Bibles,laid so broadly open in the centuries, it is permissible to regret thevisible majesty of the writing of granite, those gigantic alphabetsformulated in colonnades, in pylons, in obelisks, those sorts of humanmountains which cover the world and the past, from the pyramid to thebell tower, from Cheops to Strasburg. The past must be reread upon thesepages of marble. This book, written by architecture, must be admiredand perused incessantly; but the grandeur of the edifice which printingerects in its turn must not be denied.That edifice is colossal. Some compiler of statistics has calculated,that if all the volumes which have issued from the press sinceGutenberg day were to be piled one upon another, they would fillthe space between the earth and the moon; but it is not that sort ofgrandeur of which we wished to speak. Nevertheless, when one tries tocollect in one mind a comprehensive image of the total products ofprinting down to our own days, does not that total appear to us like animmense construction, resting upon the entire world, at which humanitytoils without relaxation, and whose monstrous crest is lost in theprofound mists of the future? It is the anthill of intelligence. It isthe hive whither come all imaginations, those golden bees, with theirhoney.The edifice has a thousand stories. Here and there one beholds on itsstaircases the gloomy caverns of science which pierce its interior.Everywhere upon its surface, art causes its arabesques, rosettes, andlaces to thrive luxuriantly before the eyes. There, every individualwork, however capricious and isolated it may seem, has its place andits projection. Harmony results from the whole. From the cathedral ofShakespeare to the mosque of Byron, a thousand tiny bell towers arepiled pellmell above this metropolis of universal thought. At its baseare written some ancient titles of humanity which architecture hadnot registered. To the left of the entrance has been fixed the ancientbasrelief, in white marble, of Homer; to the right, the polyglot Biblerears its seven heads. The hydra of the Romancero and some other hybridforms, the Vedas and the Nibelungen bristle further on.Nevertheless, the prodigious edifice still remains incomplete. Thepress, that giant machine, which incessantly pumps all the intellectualsap of society, belches forth without pause fresh materials for itswork. The whole human race is on the scaffoldings. Each mind is a mason.The humblest fills his hole, or places his stone. Retif dè le Bretonnebrings his hod of plaster. Every day a new course rises. Independentlyof the original and individual contribution of each writer, there arecollective contingents. The eighteenth century gives the _Encyclopedia_,the revolution gives the _Moniteur_. Assuredly, it is a constructionwhich increases and piles up in endless spirals; there also areconfusion of tongues, incessant activity, indefatigable labor, eagercompetition of all humanity, refuge promised to intelligence, a newFlood against an overflow of barbarians. It is the second tower of Babelof the human race.BOOK SIXTH.CHAPTER I. AN IMPARTIAL GLANCE AT THE ANCIENT MAGISTRACY.A very happy personage in the year of grace 1482, was the noblegentleman Robert d’Estouteville, chevalier, Sieur de Beyne, Baron d’Ivryand Saint Andry en la Marche, counsellor and chamberlain to the king,and guard of the provostship of Paris. It was already nearly seventeenyears since he had received from the king, on November 7, 1465, thecomet year, that fine charge of the provostship of Paris, which wasreputed rather a seigneury than an office. _Dignitas_, says JoannesLoemnoeus, _quæ cum non exigua potestate politiam concernente, atqueproerogativis multis et juribus conjuncta est_. A marvellous thing in82 was a gentleman bearing the king commission, and whose lettersof institution ran back to the epoch of the marriage of the naturaldaughter of Louis XI. with Monsieur the Bastard of Bourbon.    This comet against which Pope Calixtus, uncle of Borgia,ordered public prayers, is the same which reappeared in 1835.The same day on which Robert d’Estouteville took the place of Jacquesde Villiers in the provostship of Paris, Master Jehan Dauvet replacedMessire Helye de Thorrettes in the first presidency of the Court ofParliament, Jehan Jouvenel des Ursins supplanted Pierre de Morvilliersin the office of chancellor of France, Regnault des Dormans oustedPierre Puy from the charge of master of requests in ordinary of theking household. Now, upon how many heads had the presidency, thechancellorship, the mastership passed since Robert d’Estoutevillehad held the provostship of Paris. It had been granted to him forsafekeeping, as the letters patent said; and certainly he kept itwell. He had clung to it, he had incorporated himself with it, he hadso identified himself with it that he had escaped that fury for changewhich possessed Louis XI., a tormenting and industrious king, whosepolicy it was to maintain the elasticity of his power by frequentappointments and revocations. More than this; the brave chevalier hadobtained the reversion of the office for his son, and for two yearsalready, the name of the noble man Jacques d’Estouteville, equerry, hadfigured beside his at the head of the register of the salary list of theprovostship of Paris. A rare and notable favor indeed! It is true thatRobert d’Estouteville was a good soldier, that he had loyally raised hispennon against the league of public good, and that he had presentedto the queen a very marvellous stag in confectionery on the day of herentrance to Paris in 14... Moreover, he possessed the good friendshipof Messire Tristan l’Hermite, provost of the marshals of the kinghousehold. Hence a very sweet and pleasant existence was that of MessireRobert. In the first place, very good wages, to which were attached, andfrom which hung, like extra bunches of grapes on his vine, the revenuesof the civil and criminal registries of the provostship, plus the civiland criminal revenues of the tribunals of Embas of the Châtelet, withoutreckoning some little toll from the bridges of Mantes and of Corbeil,and the profits on the craft of Shagreenmakers of Paris, on the cordersof firewood and the measurers of salt. Add to this the pleasure ofdisplaying himself in rides about the city, and of making his finemilitary costume, which you may still admire sculptured on his tombin the abbey of Valmont in Normandy, and his morion, all embossed atMontlhéry, stand out a contrast against the particolored red and tawnyrobes of the aldermen and police. And then, was it nothing to wieldabsolute supremacy over the sergeants of the police, the porter andwatch of the Châtelet, the two auditors of the Châtelet, _auditorescastelleti_, the sixteen commissioners of the sixteen quarters, thejailer of the Châtelet, the four enfeoffed sergeants, the hundred andtwenty mounted sergeants, with maces, the chevalier of the watch withhis watch, his subwatch, his counterwatch and his rearwatch? Was itnothing to exercise high and low justice, the right to interrogate,to hang and to draw, without reckoning petty jurisdiction in the firstresort (_in prima instantia_, as the charters say), on that viscomtyof Paris, so nobly appanaged with seven noble bailiwicks? Can anythingsweeter be imagined than rendering judgments and decisions, as MessireRobert d’Estouteville daily did in the Grand Châtelet, under the largeand flattened arches of Philip Augustus? and going, as he was wont todo every evening, to that charming house situated in the Rue Galilee, inthe enclosure of the royal palace, which he held in right of his wife,Madame Ambroise de Lore, to repose after the fatigue of having sentsome poor wretch to pass the night in that little cell of the Rue deEscorcherie, which the provosts and aldermen of Paris used to make theirprison; the same being eleven feet long, seven feet and four incheswide, and eleven feet high?    Comptes du domaine, 1383.And not only had Messire Robert d’Estouteville his special court asprovost and vicomte of Paris; but in addition he had a share, both foreye and tooth, in the grand court of the king. There was no head in theleast elevated which had not passed through his hands before it came tothe headsman. It was he who went to seek M. de Nemours at the BastilleSaint Antoine, in order to conduct him to the Halles; and to conduct tothe Grève M. de SaintPol, who clamored and resisted, to the great joyof the provost, who did not love monsieur the constable.Here, assuredly, is more than sufficient to render a life happy andillustrious, and to deserve some day a notable page in that interestinghistory of the provosts of Paris, where one learns that Oudard deVilleneuve had a house in the Rue des Boucheries, that Guillaumede Hangest purchased the great and the little Savoy, that GuillaumeThiboust gave the nuns of SainteGeneviève his houses in the Rue Clopin,that Hugues Aubriot lived in the Hôtel du PoreEpic, and other domesticfacts.Nevertheless, with so many reasons for taking life patiently andjoyously, Messire Robert d’Estouteville woke up on the morning of theseventh of January, 1482, in a very surly and peevish mood. Whence camethis ill temper? He could not have told himself. Was it because the skywas gray? or was the buckle of his old belt of Montlhéry badly fastened,so that it confined his provostal portliness too closely? had he beheldribald fellows, marching in bands of four, beneath his window, andsetting him at defiance, in doublets but no shirts, hats without crowns,with wallet and bottle at their side? Was it a vague presentiment of thethree hundred and seventy livres, sixteen sous, eight farthings, whichthe future King Charles VII. was to cut off from the provostship in thefollowing year? The reader can take his choice; we, for our part, aremuch inclined to believe that he was in a bad humor, simply because hewas in a bad humor.Moreover, it was the day after a festival, a tiresome day for every one,and above all for the magistrate who is charged with sweeping away allthe filth, properly and figuratively speaking, which a festival dayproduces in Paris. And then he had to hold a sitting at the GrandChâtelet. Now, we have noticed that judges in general so arrange mattersthat their day of audience shall also be their day of bad humor, so thatthey may always have some one upon whom to vent it conveniently, in thename of the king, law, and justice.However, the audience had begun without him. His lieutenants, civil,criminal, and private, were doing his work, according to usage; andfrom eight o’clock in the morning, some scores of bourgeois and_bourgeoises_, heaped and crowded into an obscure corner of the audiencechamber of Embas du Châtelet, between a stout oaken barrier and thewall, had been gazing blissfully at the varied and cheerful spectacle ofcivil and criminal justice dispensed by Master Florian Barbedienne,auditor of the Châtelet, lieutenant of monsieur the provost, in asomewhat confused and utterly haphazard manner.The hall was small, low, vaulted. A table studded with fleursdelisstood at one end, with a large armchair of carved oak, which belongedto the provost and was empty, and a stool on the left for the auditor,Master Florian. Below sat the clerk of the court, scribbling; oppositewas the populace; and in front of the door, and in front of the tablewere many sergeants of the provostship in sleeveless jackets of violetcamlet, with white crosses. Two sergeants of the ParloirauxBourgeois,clothed in their jackets of Toussaint, half red, half blue, wereposted as sentinels before a low, closed door, which was visible atthe extremity of the hall, behind the table. A single pointed window,narrowly encased in the thick wall, illuminated with a pale ray ofJanuary sun two grotesque figures,the capricious demon of stone carvedas a tailpiece in the keystone of the vaulted ceiling, and the judgeseated at the end of the hall on the fleursdelis.Imagine, in fact, at the provost table, leaning upon his elbowsbetween two bundles of documents of cases, with his foot on the trainof his robe of plain brown cloth, his face buried in his hood of whitelamb skin, of which his brows seemed to be of a piece, red, crabbed,winking, bearing majestically the load of fat on his cheeks which metunder his chin, Master Florian Barbedienne, auditor of the Châtelet.Now, the auditor was deaf. A slight defect in an auditor. Master Floriandelivered judgment, none the less, without appeal and very suitably. Itis certainly quite sufficient for a judge to have the air of listening;and the venerable auditor fulfilled this condition, the sole one injustice, all the better because his attention could not be distracted byany noise.Moreover, he had in the audience, a pitiless censor of his deeds andgestures, in the person of our friend Jehan Frollo du Moulin, thatlittle student of yesterday, that stroller, whom one was sure ofencountering all over Paris, anywhere except before the rostrums of theprofessors.Stay, he said in a low tone to his companion, Robin Poussepain, whowas grinning at his side, while he was making his comments on the sceneswhich were being unfolded before his eyes, yonder is Jehannetondu Buisson. The beautiful daughter of the lazy dog at theMarchéNeuf!Upon my soul, he is condemning her, the old rascal! hehas no more eyes than ears. Fifteen sous, four farthings, parisian, forhaving worn two rosaries! Tis somewhat dear. _Lex duri carminis_. Whothat? Robin ChiefdeVille, hauberkmaker. For having been passed andreceived master of the said trade! That his entrance money. He! twogentlemen among these knaves! Aiglet de Soins, Hutin de Mailly Twoequerries, _Corpus Christi_! Ah! they have been playing at dice. Whenshall I see our rector here? A hundred livres parisian, fine to theking! That Barbedienne strikes like a deaf man,as he is! I’ll be mybrother the archdeacon, if that keeps me from gaming; gaming by day,gaming by night, living at play, dying at play, and gaming away my soulafter my shirt. Holy Virgin, what damsels! One after the other my lambs.Ambroise Lécuyere, Isabeau la Paynette, Bérarde Gironin! I know themall, by Heavens! A fine! a fine! That what will teach you to weargilded girdles! ten sous parisis! you coquettes! Oh! the old snout ofa judge! deaf and imbecile! Oh! Florian the dolt! Oh! Barbedienne theblockhead! There he is at the table! He eating the plaintiff, heeating the suits, he eats, he chews, he crams, he fills himself. Fines,lost goods, taxes, expenses, loyal charges, salaries, damages, andinterests, gehenna, prison, and jail, and fetters with expenses areChristmas spice cake and marchpanes of SaintJohn to him! Look athim, the pig!Come! Good! Another amorous woman! ThibaudlaThibaude,neither more nor less! For having come from the Rue Glatigny! Whatfellow is this? Gieffroy Mabonne, gendarme bearing the crossbow. Hehas cursed the name of the Father. A fine for la Thibaude! A fine forGieffroy! A fine for them both! The deaf old fool! he must have mixed upthe two cases! Ten to one that he makes the wench pay for the oath andthe gendarme for the amour! Attention, Robin Poussepain! What arethey going to bring in? Here are many sergeants! By Jupiter! all thebloodhounds of the pack are there. It must be the great beast of thehunta wild boar. And tis one, Robin, tis one. And a fine one too!_Hercle_! tis our prince of yesterday, our Pope of the Fools,our bellringer, our oneeyed man, our hunchback, our grimace! TisQuasimodo!It was he indeed.It was Quasimodo, bound, encircled, roped, pinioned, and under goodguard. The squad of policemen who surrounded him was assisted by thechevalier of the watch in person, wearing the arms of France embroideredon his breast, and the arms of the city on his back. There was nothing,however, about Quasimodo, except his deformity, which could justify thedisplay of halberds and arquebuses; he was gloomy, silent, and tranquil.Only now and then did his single eye cast a sly and wrathful glance uponthe bonds with which he was loaded.He cast the same glance about him, but it was so dull and sleepy thatthe women only pointed him out to each other in derision.Meanwhile Master Florian, the auditor, turned over attentively thedocument in the complaint entered against Quasimodo, which the clerkhanded him, and, having thus glanced at it, appeared to reflect for amoment. Thanks to this precaution, which he always was careful to takeat the moment when on the point of beginning an examination, he knewbeforehand the names, titles, and misdeeds of the accused, made cutand dried responses to questions foreseen, and succeeded in extricatinghimself from all the windings of the interrogation without allowing hisdeafness to be too apparent. The written charges were to him what thedog is to the blind man. If his deafness did happen to betray himhere and there, by some incoherent apostrophe or some unintelligiblequestion, it passed for profundity with some, and for imbecility withothers. In neither case did the honor of the magistracy sustain anyinjury; for it is far better that a judge should be reputed imbecileor profound than deaf. Hence he took great care to conceal his deafnessfrom the eyes of all, and he generally succeeded so well that he hadreached the point of deluding himself, which is, by the way, easierthan is supposed. All hunchbacks walk with their heads held high, allstutterers harangue, all deaf people speak low. As for him, he believed,at the most, that his ear was a little refractory. It was the soleconcession which he made on this point to public opinion, in his momentsof frankness and examination of his conscience.Having, then, thoroughly ruminated Quasimodo affair, he threw backhis head and half closed his eyes, for the sake of more majesty andimpartiality, so that, at that moment, he was both deaf and blind. Adouble condition, without which no judge is perfect. It was in thismagisterial attitude that he began the examination.Your name?Now this was a case which had not been provided for by law, where adeaf man should be obliged to question a deaf man.Quasimodo, whom nothing warned that a question had been addressed tohim, continued to stare intently at the judge, and made no reply. Thejudge, being deaf, and being in no way warned of the deafness of theaccused, thought that the latter had answered, as all accused do ingeneral, and therefore he pursued, with his mechanical and stupidselfpossession,Very well. And your age?Again Quasimodo made no reply to this question. The judge supposed thatit had been replied to, and continued,Now, your profession?Still the same silence. The spectators had begun, meanwhile, to whispertogether, and to exchange glances.That will do, went on the imperturbable auditor, when he supposed thatthe accused had finished his third reply. You are accused before us,_primo_, of nocturnal disturbance; _secundo_, of a dishonorable actof violence upon the person of a foolish woman, _in proejudiciummeretricis; tertio_, of rebellion and disloyalty towards the archersof the police of our lord, the king. Explain yourself upon all thesepoints.Clerk, have you written down what the prisoner has said thusfar?At this unlucky question, a burst of laughter rose from the clerktable caught by the audience, so violent, so wild, so contagious, souniversal, that the two deaf men were forced to perceive it. Quasimodoturned round, shrugging his hump with disdain, while Master Florian,equally astonished, and supposing that the laughter of the spectatorshad been provoked by some irreverent reply from the accused, renderedvisible to him by that shrug of the shoulders, apostrophized himindignantly,You have uttered a reply, knave, which deserves the halter. Do you knowto whom you are speaking?This sally was not fitted to arrest the explosion of general merriment.It struck all as so whimsical, and so ridiculous, that the wild laughtereven attacked the sergeants of the ParloiauxBourgeois, a sort ofpikemen, whose stupidity was part of their uniform. Quasimodo alonepreserved his seriousness, for the good reason that he understoodnothing of what was going on around him. The judge, more and moreirritated, thought it his duty to continue in the same tone, hopingthereby to strike the accused with a terror which should react upon theaudience, and bring it back to respect.So this is as much as to say, perverse and thieving knave that you are,that you permit yourself to be lacking in respect towards the Auditorof the Châtelet, to the magistrate committed to the popular policeof Paris, charged with searching out crimes, delinquencies, and evilconduct; with controlling all trades, and interdicting monopoly; withmaintaining the pavements; with debarring the hucksters of chickens,poultry, and waterfowl; of superintending the measuring of fagotsand other sorts of wood; of purging the city of mud, and the air ofcontagious maladies; in a word, with attending continually to publicaffairs, without wages or hope of salary! Do you know that I am calledFlorian Barbedienne, actual lieutenant to monsieur the provost, and,moreover, commissioner, inquisitor, controller, and examiner, with equalpower in provostship, bailiwick, preservation, and inferior court ofjudicature?There is no reason why a deaf man talking to a deaf man should stop.God knows where and when Master Florian would have landed, when thuslaunched at full speed in lofty eloquence, if the low door at theextreme end of the room had not suddenly opened, and given entranceto the provost in person. At his entrance Master Florian did not stopshort, but, making a halfturn on his heels, and aiming at the provostthe harangue with which he had been withering Quasimodo a momentbefore,Monseigneur, said he, I demand such penalty as you shall deem fittingagainst the prisoner here present, for grave and aggravated offenceagainst the court.And he seated himself, utterly breathless, wiping away the greatdrops of sweat which fell from his brow and drenched, like tears, theparchments spread out before him. Messire Robert d’Estouteville frownedand made a gesture so imperious and significant to Quasimodo, that thedeaf man in some measure understood it.The provost addressed him with severity, What have you done that youhave been brought hither, knave?The poor fellow, supposing that the provost was asking his name, brokethe silence which he habitually preserved, and replied, in a harsh andguttural voice, Quasimodo.The reply matched the question so little that the wild laugh began tocirculate once more, and Messire Robert exclaimed, red with wrath,Are you mocking me also, you arrant knave?Bellringer of NotreDame, replied Quasimodo, supposing that what wasrequired of him was to explain to the judge who he was.Bellringer! interpolated the provost, who had waked up early enough tobe in a sufficiently bad temper, as we have said, not to require to havehis fury inflamed by such strange responses. Bellringer! I’ll play youa chime of rods on your back through the squares of Paris! Do you hear,knave?If it is my age that you wish to know, said Quasimodo, I think that Ishall be twenty at Saint Martin day.This was too much; the provost could no longer restrain himself.Ah! you are scoffing at the provostship, wretch! Messieurs thesergeants of the mace, you will take me this knave to the pillory of theGrève, you will flog him, and turn him for an hour. He shall pay me forit, _tête Dieu_! And I order that the present judgment shall be cried,with the assistance of four sworn trumpeters, in the seven castellaniesof the viscomty of Paris.The clerk set to work incontinently to draw up the account of thesentence._Ventre Dieu_! tis well adjudged! cried the little scholar, JehanFrollo du Moulin, from his corner.The provost turned and fixed his flashing eyes once more on Quasimodo.I believe the knave said _Ventre Dieu_’ Clerk, add twelve deniersParisian for the oath, and let the vestry of Saint Eustache have thehalf of it; I have a particular devotion for Saint Eustache.In a few minutes the sentence was drawn up. Its tenor was simple andbrief. The customs of the provostship and the viscomty had not yetbeen worked over by President Thibaut Baillet, and by Roger Barmne, theking advocate; they had not been obstructed, at that time, by thatlofty hedge of quibbles and procedures, which the two jurisconsultsplanted there at the beginning of the sixteenth century. All was clear,expeditious, explicit. One went straight to the point then, and at theend of every path there was immediately visible, without thickets andwithout turnings; the wheel, the gibbet, or the pillory. One at leastknew whither one was going.The clerk presented the sentence to the provost, who affixed his seal toit, and departed to pursue his round of the audience hall, in a frameof mind which seemed destined to fill all the jails in Paris that day.Jehan Frollo and Robin Poussepain laughed in their sleeves. Quasimodogazed on the whole with an indifferent and astonished air.However, at the moment when Master Florian Barbedienne was reading thesentence in his turn, before signing it, the clerk felt himself movedwith pity for the poor wretch of a prisoner, and, in the hope ofobtaining some mitigation of the penalty, he approached as near theauditor ear as possible, and said, pointing to Quasimodo, That man isdeaf.He hoped that this community of infirmity would awaken Master Florianinterest in behalf of the condemned man. But, in the first place, wehave already observed that Master Florian did not care to have hisdeafness noticed. In the next place, he was so hard of hearing That hedid not catch a single word of what the clerk said to him; nevertheless,he wished to have the appearance of hearing, and replied, Ah! ah! thatis different; I did not know that. An hour more of the pillory, in thatcase.And he signed the sentence thus modified.Tis well done, said Robin Poussepain, who cherished a grudge againstQuasimodo. That will teach him to handle people roughly.CHAPTER II. THE RATHOLE.The reader must permit us to take him back to the Place de Grève, whichwe quitted yesterday with Gringoire, in order to follow la Esmeralda.It is ten o’clock in the morning; everything is indicative of the dayafter a festival. The pavement is covered with rubbish; ribbons, rags,feathers from tufts of plumes, drops of wax from the torches, crumbs ofthe public feast. A goodly number of bourgeois are sauntering, as wesay, here and there, turning over with their feet the extinct brands ofthe bonfire, going into raptures in front of the Pillar House, over thememory of the fine hangings of the day before, and today staring at thenails that secured them a last pleasure. The venders of cider and beerare rolling their barrels among the groups. Some busy passersbycome and go. The merchants converse and call to each other from thethresholds of their shops. The festival, the ambassadors, Coppenole,the Pope of the Fools, are in all mouths; they vie with each other, eachtrying to criticise it best and laugh the most. And, meanwhile, fourmounted sergeants, who have just posted themselves at the four sidesof the pillory, have already concentrated around themselves a goodlyproportion of the populace scattered on the Place, who condemnthemselves to immobility and fatigue in the hope of a small execution.If the reader, after having contemplated this lively and noisy scenewhich is being enacted in all parts of the Place, will now transferhis gaze towards that ancient demiGothic, demiRomanesque house of theTourRoland, which forms the corner on the quay to the west, he willobserve, at the angle of the façade, a large public breviary, with richilluminations, protected from the rain by a little penthouse, and fromthieves by a small grating, which, however, permits of the leaves beingturned. Beside this breviary is a narrow, arched window, closed by twoiron bars in the form of a cross, and looking on the square; the onlyopening which admits a small quantity of light and air to a little cellwithout a door, constructed on the groundfloor, in the thickness of thewalls of the old house, and filled with a peace all the more profound,with a silence all the more gloomy, because a public place, the mostpopulous and most noisy in Paris swarms and shrieks around it.This little cell had been celebrated in Paris for nearly threecenturies, ever since Madame Rolande de la TourRoland, in mourning forher father who died in the Crusades, had caused it to be hollowed outin the wall of her own house, in order to immure herself there forever,keeping of all her palace only this lodging whose door was walled up,and whose window stood open, winter and summer, giving all the rest tothe poor and to God. The afflicted damsel had, in fact, waited twentyyears for death in this premature tomb, praying night and day forthe soul of her father, sleeping in ashes, without even a stone for apillow, clothed in a black sack, and subsisting on the bread and waterwhich the compassion of the passersby led them to deposit on the ledgeof her window, thus receiving charity after having bestowed it. At herdeath, at the moment when she was passing to the other sepulchre, shehad bequeathed this one in perpetuity to afflicted women, mothers,widows, or maidens, who should wish to pray much for others or forthemselves, and who should desire to inter themselves alive in a greatgrief or a great penance. The poor of her day had made her a finefuneral, with tears and benedictions; but, to their great regret, thepious maid had not been canonized, for lack of influence. Those amongthem who were a little inclined to impiety, had hoped that the mattermight be accomplished in Paradise more easily than at Rome, and hadfrankly besought God, instead of the pope, in behalf of the deceased.The majority had contented themselves with holding the memory of Rolandesacred, and converting her rags into relics. The city, on its side, hadfounded in honor of the damoiselle, a public breviary, which had beenfastened near the window of the cell, in order that passersby mighthalt there from time to time, were it only to pray; that prayer mightremind them of alms, and that the poor recluses, heiresses of MadameRolande vault, might not die outright of hunger and forgetfulness.Moreover, this sort of tomb was not so very rare a thing in the citiesof the Middle Ages. One often encountered in the most frequented street,in the most crowded and noisy market, in the very middle, under the feetof the horses, under the wheels of the carts, as it were, a cellar, awell, a tiny walled and grated cabin, at the bottom of which a humanbeing prayed night and day, voluntarily devoted to some eternallamentation, to some great expiation. And all the reflections which thatstrange spectacle would awaken in us today; that horrible cell, a sortof intermediary link between a house and the tomb, the cemetery andthe city; that living being cut off from the human community, andthenceforth reckoned among the dead; that lamp consuming its last dropof oil in the darkness; that remnant of life flickering in the grave;that breath, that voice, that eternal prayer in a box of stone;that face forever turned towards the other world; that eye alreadyilluminated with another sun; that ear pressed to the walls of a tomb;that soul a prisoner in that body; that body a prisoner in that dungeoncell, and beneath that double envelope of flesh and granite, the murmurof that soul in pain;nothing of all this was perceived by the crowd.The piety of that age, not very subtle nor much given to reasoning, didnot see so many facets in an act of religion. It took the thing in theblock, honored, venerated, hallowed the sacrifice at need, but did notanalyze the sufferings, and felt but moderate pity for them. It broughtsome pittance to the miserable penitent from time to time, lookedthrough the hole to see whether he were still living, forgot his name,hardly knew how many years ago he had begun to die, and to the stranger,who questioned them about the living skeleton who was perishing in thatcellar, the neighbors replied simply, It is the recluse.Everything was then viewed without metaphysics, without exaggeration,without magnifying glass, with the naked eye. The microscope had not yetbeen invented, either for things of matter or for things of the mind.Moreover, although people were but little surprised by it, the examplesof this sort of cloistration in the hearts of cities were in truthfrequent, as we have just said. There were in Paris a considerablenumber of these cells, for praying to God and doing penance; they werenearly all occupied. It is true that the clergy did not like to havethem empty, since that implied lukewarmness in believers, and thatlepers were put into them when there were no penitents on hand. Besidesthe cell on the Grève, there was one at Montfauçon, one at the Charnierdes Innocents, another I hardly know where,at the Clichon House, Ithink; others still at many spots where traces of them are found intraditions, in default of memorials. The University had also its own. OnMount SainteGeneviève a sort of Job of the Middle Ages, for the spaceof thirty years, chanted the seven penitential psalms on a dunghill atthe bottom of a cistern, beginning anew when he had finished, singingloudest at night, _magna voce per umbras_, and today, theantiquary fancies that he hears his voice as he enters the Rue duPuitsquiparlethe street of the Speaking Well.To confine ourselves to the cell in the TourRoland, we must say thatit had never lacked recluses. After the death of Madame Roland, ithad stood vacant for a year or two, though rarely. Many women had comethither to mourn, until their death, for relatives, lovers, faults.Parisian malice, which thrusts its finger into everything, even intothings which concern it the least, affirmed that it had beheld but fewwidows there.In accordance with the fashion of the epoch, a Latin inscription on thewall indicated to the learned passerby the pious purpose of this cell.The custom was retained until the middle of the sixteenth century ofexplaining an edifice by a brief device inscribed above the door.Thus, one still reads in France, above the wicket of the prison in theseignorial mansion of Tourville, _Sileto et spera_; in Ireland, beneaththe armorial bearings which surmount the grand door to Fortescue Castle,_Forte scutum, salus ducum_; in England, over the principal entranceto the hospitable mansion of the Earls Cowper: _Tuum est_. At that timeevery edifice was a thought.As there was no door to the walled cell of the TourRoland, these twowords had been carved in large Roman capitals over the window,  TU, ORA.And this caused the people, whose good sense does not perceive so muchrefinement in things, and likes to translate _Ludovico Magno_ by PorteSaintDenis, to give to this dark, gloomy, damp cavity, the name ofThe RatHole. An explanation less sublime, perhaps, than the other;but, on the other hand, more picturesque.CHAPTER III. HISTORY OF A LEAVENED CAKE OF MAIZE.At the epoch of this history, the cell in the TourRoland was occupied.If the reader desires to know by whom, he has only to lend an ear to theconversation of three worthy gossips, who, at the moment when we havedirected his attention to the RatHole, were directing their stepstowards the same spot, coming up along the water edge from theChâtelet, towards the Grève.Two of these women were dressed like good _bourgeoises_ of Paris. Theirfine white ruffs; their petticoats of linseywoolsey, striped red andblue; their white knitted stockings, with clocks embroidered in colors,well drawn upon their legs; the squaretoed shoes of tawny leather withblack soles, and, above all, their headgear, that sort of tinsel horn,loaded down with ribbons and laces, which the women of Champagne stillwear, in company with the grenadiers of the imperial guard of Russia,announced that they belonged to that class wives which holds the middleground between what the lackeys call a woman and what they term a lady.They wore neither rings nor gold crosses, and it was easy to see that,in their ease, this did not proceed from poverty, but simply fromfear of being fined. Their companion was attired in very much the samemanner; but there was that indescribable something about her dress andbearing which suggested the wife of a provincial notary. One could see,by the way in which her girdle rose above her hips, that she had notbeen long in Paris.Add to this a plaited tucker, knots of ribbonon her shoesand that the stripes of her petticoat ran horizontallyinstead of vertically, and a thousand other enormities which shockedgood taste.The two first walked with that step peculiar to Parisian ladies, showingParis to women from the country. The provincial held by the hand a bigboy, who held in his a large, flat cake.We regret to be obliged to add, that, owing to the rigor of the season,he was using his tongue as a handkerchief.The child was making them drag him along, _non passibus Cequis_, asVirgil says, and stumbling at every moment, to the great indignation ofhis mother. It is true that he was looking at his cake more than at thepavement. Some serious motive, no doubt, prevented his biting it (thecake), for he contented himself with gazing tenderly at it. But themother should have rather taken charge of the cake. It was cruel to makea Tantalus of the chubbychecked boy.Meanwhile, the three demoiselles (for the name of dames was thenreserved for noble women) were all talking at once.Let us make haste, Demoiselle Mahiette, said the youngest of thethree, who was also the largest, to the provincial, I greatly fear thatwe shall arrive too late; they told us at the Châtelet that they weregoing to take him directly to the pillory.Ah, bah! what are you saying, Demoiselle Oudarde Musnier? interposedthe other Parisienne. There are two hours yet to the pillory. We havetime enough. Have you ever seen any one pilloried, my dear Mahiette?Yes, said the provincial, at Reims.Ah, bah! What is your pillory at Reims? A miserable cage into whichonly peasants are turned. A great affair, truly!Only peasants! said Mahiette, at the cloth market in Reims! We haveseen very fine criminals there, who have killed their father and mother!Peasants! For what do you take us, Gervaise?It is certain that the provincial was on the point of taking offence,for the honor of her pillory. Fortunately, that discreet damoiselle,Oudarde Musnier, turned the conversation in time.By the way, Damoiselle Mahiette, what say you to our FlemishAmbassadors? Have you as fine ones at Reims?I admit, replied Mahiette, that it is only in Paris that suchFlemings can be seen.Did you see among the embassy, that big ambassador who is a hosier? asked Oudarde.Yes, said Mahiette. He has the eye of a Saturn.And the big fellow whose face resembles a bare belly? resumedGervaise. And the little one, with small eyes framed in red eyelids,pared down and slashed up like a thistle head?Tis their horses that are worth seeing, said Oudarde, caparisoned asthey are after the fashion of their country!Ah my dear, interrupted provincial Mahiette, assuming in her turn anair of superiority, what would you say then, if you had seen in 61, atthe consecration at Reims, eighteen years ago, the horses of the princesand of the king company? Housings and caparisons of all sorts; someof damask cloth, of fine cloth of gold, furred with sables; others ofvelvet, furred with ermine; others all embellished with goldsmith workand large bells of gold and silver! And what money that had cost! Andwhat handsome boy pages rode upon them!That, replied Oudarde dryly, does not prevent the Flemings havingvery fine horses, and having had a superb supper yesterday withmonsieur, the provost of the merchants, at the HôteldeVille, wherethey were served with comfits and hippocras, and spices, and othersingularities.What are you saying, neighbor! exclaimed Gervaise. It was withmonsieur the cardinal, at the Petit Bourbon that they supped.Not at all. At the HôteldeVille.Yes, indeed. At the Petit Bourbon!It was at the HôteldeVille, retorted Oudarde sharply, and Dr.Scourable addressed them a harangue in Latin, which pleased themgreatly. My husband, who is sworn bookseller told me.It was at the Petit Bourbon, replied Gervaise, with no less spirit,and this is what monsieur the cardinal procurator presented to them:twelve double quarts of hippocras, white, claret, and red; twentyfourboxes of double Lyons marchpane, gilded; as many torches, worth twolivres a piece; and six demiqueues of Beaune wine, white and claret,the best that could be found. I have it from my husband, who is acinquantenier, at the Parloiraux Bourgeois, and who was this morningcomparing the Flemish ambassadors with those of Prester John and theEmperor of Trebizond, who came from Mesopotamia to Paris, under the lastking, and who wore rings in their ears.    A Queue was a cask which held a hogshead and a half.    A captain of fifty men.So true is it that they supped at the HôteldeVille, replied Oudardebut little affected by this catalogue, that such a triumph of viandsand comfits has never been seen.I tell you that they were served by Le Sec, sergeant of the city, atthe Hôtel du PetitBourbon, and that that is where you are mistaken.At the HôteldeVille, I tell you!At the PetitBourbon, my dear! and they had illuminated with magicglasses the word hope, which is written on the grand portal.At the HôteldeVille! At the HôteldeVille! And HussonleVoir playedthe flute!I tell you, no!I tell you, yes!I say, no!Plump and worthy Oudarde was preparing to retort, and the quarrel might,perhaps, have proceeded to a pulling of caps, had not Mahiette suddenlyexclaimed,Look at those people assembled yonder at the end of thebridge! There is something in their midst that they are looking at!In sooth, said Gervaise, I hear the sounds of a tambourine. I believetis the little Esmeralda, who plays her mummeries with her goat. Eh,be quick, Mahiette! redouble your pace and drag along your boy. Youare come hither to visit the curiosities of Paris. You saw the Flemingsyesterday; you must see the gypsy today.The gypsy! said Mahiette, suddenly retracing her steps, and claspingher son arm forcibly. God preserve me from it! She would steal mychild from me! Come, Eustache!And she set out on a run along the quay towards the Grève, until she hadleft the bridge far behind her. In the meanwhile, the child whom she wasdragging after her fell upon his knees; she halted breathless. Oudardeand Gervaise rejoined her.That gypsy steal your child from you! said Gervaise. That asingular freak of yours!Mahiette shook her head with a pensive air.The singular point is, observed Oudarde, that _la sachette_ has thesame idea about the Egyptian woman.What is _la sachette_? asked Mahiette.Hé! said Oudarde, Sister Gudule.And who is Sister Gudule? persisted Mahiette.You are certainly ignorant of all but your Reims, not to know that! replied Oudarde. Tis the recluse of the RatHole.What! demanded Mahiette, that poor woman to whom we are carrying thiscake?Oudarde nodded affirmatively.Precisely. You will see her presently at her window on the Grève. Shehas the same opinion as yourself of these vagabonds of Egypt, who playthe tambourine and tell fortunes to the public. No one knows whencecomes her horror of the gypsies and Egyptians. But you, Mahiettewhy doyou run so at the mere sight of them?Oh! said Mahiette, seizing her child round head in both hands,I don’t want that to happen to me which happened to Paquette laChantefleurie.Oh! you must tell us that story, my good Mahiette, said Gervaise,taking her arm.Gladly, replied Mahiette, but you must be ignorant of all but yourParis not to know that! I will tell you then (but tis not necessary forus to halt that I may tell you the tale), that Paquette la Chantefleuriewas a pretty maid of eighteen when I was one myself, that is to say,eighteen years ago, and tis her own fault if she is not today, likeme, a good, plump, fresh mother of six and thirty, with a husband and ason. However, after the age of fourteen, it was too late! Well, she wasthe daughter of Guybertant, minstrel of the barges at Reims, the samewho had played before King Charles VII., at his coronation, when hedescended our river Vesle from Sillery to Muison, when Madame the Maidof Orleans was also in the boat. The old father died when Paquette wasstill a mere child; she had then no one but her mother, the sister ofM. Pradon, masterbrazier and coppersmith in Paris, Rue FarmGarlin, whodied last year. You see she was of good family. The mother was a goodsimple woman, unfortunately, and she taught Paquette nothing but a bitof embroidery and toymaking which did not prevent the little one fromgrowing very large and remaining very poor. They both dwelt at Reims,on the river front, Rue de FollePeine. Mark this: For I believe itwas this which brought misfortune to Paquette. In 61, the year of thecoronation of our King Louis XI. whom God preserve! Paquette was so gayand so pretty that she was called everywhere by no other name than laChantefleurieblossoming song. Poor girl! She had handsome teeth, shewas fond of laughing and displaying them. Now, a maid who loves to laughis on the road to weeping; handsome teeth ruin handsome eyes. So she wasla Chantefleurie. She and her mother earned a precarious living;they had been very destitute since the death of the minstrel; theirembroidery did not bring them in more than six farthings a week, whichdoes not amount to quite two eagle liards. Where were the dayswhen Father Guybertant had earned twelve sous parisian, in a singlecoronation, with a song? One winter (it was in that same year of 61),when the two women had neither fagots nor firewood, it was very cold,which gave la Chantefleurie such a fine color that the men calledher Paquette! and many called her Pàquerette! and she wasruined.Eustache, just let me see you bite that cake if you dare!Weimmediately perceived that she was ruined, one Sunday when she came tochurch with a gold cross about her neck. At fourteen years of age! doyou see? First it was the young Vicomte de Cormontreuil, who has hisbell tower three leagues distant from Reims; then Messire Henride Triancourt, equerry to the King; then less than that, Chiart deBeaulion, sergeantatarms; then, still descending, Guery Aubergeon,carver to the King; then, Mace de Frépus, barber to monsieur thedauphin; then, Thévenin le Moine, King cook; then, the men growingcontinually younger and less noble, she fell to Guillaume Racine,minstrel of the hurdy gurdy and to Thierry de Mer, lamplighter. Then,poor Chantefleurie, she belonged to every one: she had reached the lastsou of her gold piece. What shall I say to you, my damoiselles? At thecoronation, in the same year, 61, twas she who made the bed of theking of the debauchees! In the same year!    Oxeye daisy.    Easter daisy.Mahiette sighed, and wiped away a tear which trickled from her eyes.This is no very extraordinary history, said Gervaise, and in thewhole of it I see nothing of any Egyptian women or children.Patience! resumed Mahiette, you will see one child.In 66, twillbe sixteen years ago this month, at SaintePaule day, Paquette wasbrought to bed of a little girl. The unhappy creature! it was a greatjoy to her; she had long wished for a child. Her mother, good woman, whohad never known what to do except to shut her eyes, her mother was dead.Paquette had no longer any one to love in the world or any one to loveher. La Chantefleurie had been a poor creature during the five yearssince her fall. She was alone, alone in this life, fingers were pointedat her, she was hooted at in the streets, beaten by the sergeants,jeered at by the little boys in rags. And then, twenty had arrived: andtwenty is an old age for amorous women. Folly began to bring her in nomore than her trade of embroidery in former days; for every wrinkle thatcame, a crown fled; winter became hard to her once more, wood becamerare again in her brazier, and bread in her cupboard. She could nolonger work because, in becoming voluptuous, she had grown lazy; and shesuffered much more because, in growing lazy, she had become voluptuous.At least, that is the way in which monsieur the cure of SaintRemyexplains why these women are colder and hungrier than other poor women,when they are old.Yes, remarked Gervaise, but the gypsies?One moment, Gervaise! said Oudarde, whose attention was lessimpatient. What would be left for the end if all were in the beginning?Continue, Mahiette, I entreat you. That poor Chantefleurie!Mahiette went on.So she was very sad, very miserable, and furrowed her cheeks withtears. But in the midst of her shame, her folly, her debauchery,it seemed to her that she should be less wild, less shameful, lessdissipated, if there were something or some one in the world whom shecould love, and who could love her. It was necessary that it should be achild, because only a child could be sufficiently innocent for that. Shehad recognized this fact after having tried to love a thief, the onlyman who wanted her; but after a short time, she perceived that the thiefdespised her. Those women of love require either a lover or a child tofill their hearts. Otherwise, they are very unhappy. As she could nothave a lover, she turned wholly towards a desire for a child, and as shehad not ceased to be pious, she made her constant prayer to the goodGod for it. So the good God took pity on her, and gave her a littledaughter. I will not speak to you of her joy; it was a fury oftears, and caresses, and kisses. She nursed her child herself, madeswaddlingbands for it out of her coverlet, the only one which shehad on her bed, and no longer felt either cold or hunger. She becamebeautiful once more, in consequence of it. An old maid makes ayoung mother. Gallantry claimed her once more; men came to see laChantefleurie; she found customers again for her merchandise, and outof all these horrors she made baby clothes, caps and bibs, bodiceswith shoulderstraps of lace, and tiny bonnets of satin, without eventhinking of buying herself another coverlet.Master Eustache, I havealready told you not to eat that cake.It is certain that little Agnes,that was the child name, a baptismal name, for it was a long timesince la Chantefleurie had had any surnameit is certain thatthat little one was more swathed in ribbons and embroideries than adauphiness of Dauphiny! Among other things, she had a pair of littleshoes, the like of which King Louis XI. certainly never had! Her motherhad stitched and embroidered them herself; she had lavished on them allthe delicacies of her art of embroideress, and all the embellishments ofa robe for the good Virgin. They certainly were the two prettiest littlepink shoes that could be seen. They were no longer than my thumb, andone had to see the child little feet come out of them, in order tobelieve that they had been able to get into them. Tis true that thoselittle feet were so small, so pretty, so rosy! rosier than the satin ofthe shoes! When you have children, Oudarde, you will find that there isnothing prettier than those little hands and feet.I ask no better, said Oudarde with a sigh, but I am waiting until itshall suit the good pleasure of M. Andry Musnier.However, Paquette child had more that was pretty about it besides itsfeet. I saw her when she was only four months old; she was a love! Shehad eyes larger than her mouth, and the most charming black hair, whichalready curled. She would have been a magnificent brunette at the ageof sixteen! Her mother became more crazy over her every day. She kissedher, caressed her, tickled her, washed her, decked her out, devouredher! She lost her head over her, she thanked God for her. Her pretty,little rosy feet above all were an endless source of wonderment, theywere a delirium of joy! She was always pressing her lips to them, andshe could never recover from her amazement at their smallness. She putthem into the tiny shoes, took them out, admired them, marvelled atthem, looked at the light through them, was curious to see them try towalk on her bed, and would gladly have passed her life on her knees,putting on and taking off the shoes from those feet, as though they hadbeen those of an Infant Jesus.The tale is fair and good, said Gervaise in a low tone; but where dogypsies come into all that?Here, replied Mahiette. One day there arrived in Reims a very queersort of people. They were beggars and vagabonds who were roaming overthe country, led by their duke and their counts. They were browned byexposure to the sun, they had closely curling hair, and silver rings intheir ears. The women were still uglier than the men. They had blackerfaces, which were always uncovered, a miserable frock on their bodies,an old cloth woven of cords bound upon their shoulder, and their hairhanging like the tail of a horse. The children who scrambledbetween their legs would have frightened as many monkeys. A band ofexcommunicates. All these persons came direct from lower Egypt toReims through Poland. The Pope had confessed them, it was said, and hadprescribed to them as penance to roam through the world for seven years,without sleeping in a bed; and so they were called penancers, and smelthorribly. It appears that they had formerly been Saracens, which waswhy they believed in Jupiter, and claimed ten livres of Tournay from allarchbishops, bishops, and mitred abbots with croziers. A bull from thePope empowered them to do that. They came to Reims to tell fortunes inthe name of the King of Algiers, and the Emperor of Germany. You canreadily imagine that no more was needed to cause the entrance to thetown to be forbidden them. Then the whole band camped with good graceoutside the gate of Braine, on that hill where stands a mill, beside thecavities of the ancient chalk pits. And everybody in Reims vied with hisneighbor in going to see them. They looked at your hand, and told youmarvellous prophecies; they were equal to predicting to Judas that hewould become Pope. Nevertheless, ugly rumors were in circulation inregard to them; about children stolen, purses cut, and human fleshdevoured. The wise people said to the foolish: Don’t go there! andthen went themselves on the sly. It was an infatuation. The fact is,that they said things fit to astonish a cardinal. Mothers triumphedgreatly over their little ones after the Egyptians had read in theirhands all sorts of marvels written in pagan and in Turkish. One had anemperor; another, a pope; another, a captain. Poor Chantefleurie wasseized with curiosity; she wished to know about herself, and whetherher pretty little Agnes would not become some day Empress of Armenia,or something else. So she carried her to the Egyptians; and the Egyptianwomen fell to admiring the child, and to caressing it, and to kissing itwith their black mouths, and to marvelling over its little band, alas!to the great joy of the mother. They were especially enthusiastic overher pretty feet and shoes. The child was not yet a year old. She alreadylisped a little, laughed at her mother like a little mad thing, wasplump and quite round, and possessed a thousand charming little gesturesof the angels of paradise.She was very much frightened by the Egyptians, and wept. But her motherkissed her more warmly and went away enchanted with the good fortunewhich the soothsayers had foretold for her Agnes. She was to be abeauty, virtuous, a queen. So she returned to her attic in the RueFollePeine, very proud of bearing with her a queen. The next day shetook advantage of a moment when the child was asleep on her bed, (forthey always slept together), gently left the door a little way open, andran to tell a neighbor in the Rue de la Séchesserie, that the day wouldcome when her daughter Agnes would be served at table by the King ofEngland and the Archduke of Ethiopia, and a hundred other marvels. Onher return, hearing no cries on the staircase, she said to herself:Good! the child is still asleep!’ She found her door wider open thanshe had left it, but she entered, poor mother, and ran to the bed.Thechild was no longer there, the place was empty. Nothing remained of thechild, but one of her pretty little shoes. She flew out of the room,dashed down the stairs, and began to beat her head against the wall,crying: My child! who has my child? Who has taken my child?’ The streetwas deserted, the house isolated; no one could tell her anything aboutit. She went about the town, searched all the streets, ran hither andthither the whole day long, wild, beside herself, terrible, snuffing atdoors and windows like a wild beast which has lost its young. She wasbreathless, dishevelled, frightful to see, and there was a fire in hereyes which dried her tears. She stopped the passersby and cried: Mydaughter! my daughter! my pretty little daughter! If any one will giveme back my daughter, I will be his servant, the servant of his dog, andhe shall eat my heart if he will.’ She met M. le Curé of SaintRemy, andsaid to him: Monsieur, I will till the earth with my fingernails, butgive me back my child!’ It was heartrending, Oudarde; and IL saw a veryhard man, Master Ponce Lacabre, the procurator, weep. Ah! poor mother!In the evening she returned home. During her absence, a neighbor hadseen two gypsies ascend up to it with a bundle in their arms, thendescend again, after closing the door. After their departure, somethinglike the cries of a child were heard in Paquette room. The mother,burst into shrieks of laughter, ascended the stairs as though on wings,and entered.A frightful thing to tell, Oudarde! Instead of her prettylittle Agnes, so rosy and so fresh, who was a gift of the good God, asort of hideous little monster, lame, oneeyed, deformed, was crawlingand squalling over the floor. She hid her eyes in horror. Oh!’ saidshe, have the witches transformed my daughter into this horribleanimal?’ They hastened to carry away the little clubfoot; he would havedriven her mad. It was the monstrous child of some gypsy woman, who hadgiven herself to the devil. He appeared to be about four years old,and talked a language which was no human tongue; there were words in itwhich were impossible. La Chantefleurie flung herself upon the littleshoe, all that remained to her of all that she loved. She remained solong motionless over it, mute, and without breath, that they thought shewas dead. Suddenly she trembled all over, covered her relic with furiouskisses, and burst out sobbing as though her heart were broken. I assureyou that we were all weeping also. She said: Oh, my little daughter! mypretty little daughter! where art thou?’and it wrung your very heart.I weep still when I think of it. Our children are the marrow of ourbones, you see.My poor Eustache! thou art so fair!If you only knewhow nice he is! yesterday he said to me: I want to be a gendarme,that I do.’ Oh! my Eustache! if I were to lose thee!All at once laChantefleurie rose, and set out to run through Reims, screaming: To thegypsies’ camp! to the gypsies’ camp! Police, to burn the witches!’ Thegypsies were gone. It was pitch dark. They could not be followed. On themorrow, two leagues from Reims, on a heath between Gueux and Tilloy, theremains of a large fire were found, some ribbons which had belonged toPaquette child, drops of blood, and the dung of a ram. The nightjust past had been a Saturday. There was no longer any doubt thatthe Egyptians had held their Sabbath on that heath, and that they haddevoured the child in company with Beelzebub, as the practice is amongthe Mahometans. When La Chantefleurie learned these horrible things, shedid not weep, she moved her lips as though to speak, but could not. Onthe morrow, her hair was gray. On the second day, she had disappeared.Tis in truth, a frightful tale, said Oudarde, and one which wouldmake even a Burgundian weep.I am no longer surprised, added Gervaise, that fear of the gypsiesshould spur you on so sharply.And you did all the better, resumed Oudarde, to flee with yourEustache just now, since these also are gypsies from Poland.No, said Gervais, tis said that they come from Spain and Catalonia.Catalonia? tis possible, replied Oudarde. Pologne, Catalogue,Valogne, I always confound those three provinces, One thing is certain,that they are gypsies.Who certainly, added Gervaise, have teeth long enough to eat littlechildren. I should not be surprised if la Sméralda ate a little of themalso, though she pretends to be dainty. Her white goat knows tricks thatare too malicious for there not to be some impiety underneath it all.Mahiette walked on in silence. She was absorbed in that revery which is,in some sort, the continuation of a mournful tale, and which ends onlyafter having communicated the emotion, from vibration to vibration, evento the very last fibres of the heart. Nevertheless, Gervaise addressedher, And did they ever learn what became of la Chantefleurie? Mahiettemade no reply. Gervaise repeated her question, and shook her arm,calling her by name. Mahiette appeared to awaken from her thoughts.What became of la Chantefleurie? she said, repeating mechanicallythe words whose impression was still fresh in her ear; then, ma king aneffort to recall her attention to the meaning of her words, Ah! shecontinued briskly, no one ever found out.She added, after a pause,Some said that she had been seen to quit Reims at nightfall by theFléchembault gate; others, at daybreak, by the old Basée gate. A poorman found her gold cross hanging on the stone cross in the field wherethe fair is held. It was that ornament which had wrought her ruin, in61. It was a gift from the handsome Vicomte de Cormontreuil, her firstlover. Paquette had never been willing to part with it, wretched as shehad been. She had clung to it as to life itself. So, when we saw thatcross abandoned, we all thought that she was dead. Nevertheless, therewere people of the Cabaret les Vantes, who said that they had seen herpass along the road to Paris, walking on the pebbles with her bare feet.But, in that case, she must have gone out through the Porte de Vesle,and all this does not agree. Or, to speak more truly, I believe thatshe actually did depart by the Porte de Vesle, but departed from thisworld.I do not understand you, said Gervaise.La Vesle, replied Mahiette, with a melancholy smile, is the river.Poor Chantefleurie! said Oudarde, with a shiver,drowned!Drowned! resumed Mahiette, who could have told good FatherGuybertant, when he passed under the bridge of Tingueux with thecurrent, singing in his barge, that one day his dear little Paquettewould also pass beneath that bridge, but without song or boat.And the little shoe? asked Gervaise.Disappeared with the mother, replied Mahiette.Poor little shoe! said Oudarde.Oudarde, a big and tender woman, would have been well pleased to sigh incompany with Mahiette. But Gervaise, more curious, had not finished herquestions.And the monster? she said suddenly, to Mahiette.What monster? inquired the latter.The little gypsy monster left by the sorceresses in Chantefleuriechamber, in exchange for her daughter. What did you do with it? I hopeyou drowned it also.No. replied Mahiette.What? You burned it then? In sooth, that is more just. A witch child!Neither the one nor the other, Gervaise. Monseigneur the archbishopinterested himself in the child of Egypt, exorcised it, blessed it,removed the devil carefully from its body, and sent it to Paris, to beexposed on the wooden bed at NotreDame, as a foundling.Those bishops! grumbled Gervaise, because they are learned, they donothing like anybody else. I just put it to you, Oudarde, the idea ofplacing the devil among the foundlings! For that little monster wasassuredly the devil. Well, Mahiette, what did they do with it in Paris?I am quite sure that no charitable person wanted it.I do not know, replied the Rémoise, twas just at that time that myhusband bought the office of notary, at Bern, two leagues from the town,and we were no longer occupied with that story; besides, in frontof Bern, stand the two hills of Cernay, which hide the towers of thecathedral in Reims from view.While chatting thus, the three worthy _bourgeoises_ had arrived at thePlace de Grève. In their absorption, they had passed the public breviaryof the TourRoland without stopping, and took their way mechanicallytowards the pillory around which the throng was growing more dense withevery moment. It is probable that the spectacle which at that momentattracted all looks in that direction, would have made them forgetcompletely the RatHole, and the halt which they intended to make there,if big Eustache, six years of age, whom Mahiette was dragging along bythe hand, had not abruptly recalled the object to them: Mother, saidhe, as though some instinct warned him that the RatHole was behind him,can I eat the cake now?If Eustache had been more adroit, that is to say, less greedy, hewould have continued to wait, and would only have hazarded that simplequestion, Mother, can I eat the cake, now? on their return to theUniversity, to Master Andry Musnier, Rue Madame la Valence, when hehad the two arms of the Seine and the five bridges of the city betweenthe RatHole and the cake.This question, highly imprudent at the moment when Eustache put it,aroused Mahiette attention.By the way, she exclaimed, we are forgetting the recluse! Show me theRatHole, that I may carry her her cake.Immediately, said Oudarde, tis a charity.But this did not suit Eustache.Stop! my cake! said he, rubbing both ears alternatively with hisshoulders, which, in such cases, is the supreme sign of discontent.The three women retraced their steps, and, on arriving in the vicinityof the TourRoland, Oudarde said to the other two,We must not all three gaze into the hole at once, for fear of alarmingthe recluse. Do you two pretend to read the _Dominus_ in the breviary,while I thrust my nose into the aperture; the recluse knows me a little.I will give you warning when you can approach.She proceeded alone to the window. At the moment when she looked in,a profound pity was depicted on all her features, and her frank, gayvisage altered its expression and color as abruptly as though it hadpassed from a ray of sunlight to a ray of moonlight; her eye becamehumid; her mouth contracted, like that of a person on the point ofweeping. A moment later, she laid her finger on her lips, and made asign to Mahiette to draw near and look.Mahiette, much touched, stepped up in silence, on tiptoe, as thoughapproaching the bedside of a dying person.It was, in fact, a melancholy spectacle which presented itself tothe eyes of the two women, as they gazed through the grating of theRatHole, neither stirring nor breathing.The cell was small, broader than it was long, with an arched ceiling,and viewed from within, it bore a considerable resemblance to theinterior of a huge bishop mitre. On the bare flagstones which formedthe floor, in one corner, a woman was sitting, or rather, crouching. Herchin rested on her knees, which her crossed arms pressed forcibly toher breast. Thus doubled up, clad in a brown sack, which envelopedher entirely in large folds, her long, gray hair pulled over in front,falling over her face and along her legs nearly to her feet, shepresented, at the first glance, only a strange form outlined against thedark background of the cell, a sort of dusky triangle, which the ray ofdaylight falling through the opening, cut roughly into two shades, theone sombre, the other illuminated. It was one of those spectres,half light, half shadow, such as one beholds in dreams and in theextraordinary work of Goya, pale, motionless, sinister, crouching over atomb, or leaning against the grating of a prison cell.It was neither a woman, nor a man, nor a living being, nor a definiteform; it was a figure, a sort of vision, in which the real and thefantastic intersected each other, like darkness and day. It was withdifficulty that one distinguished, beneath her hair which spread tothe ground, a gaunt and severe profile; her dress barely allowed theextremity of a bare foot to escape, which contracted on the hard, coldpavement. The little of human form of which one caught a sight beneaththis envelope of mourning, caused a shudder.That figure, which one might have supposed to be riveted to theflagstones, appeared to possess neither movement, nor thought, norbreath. Lying, in January, in that thin, linen sack, lying on a granitefloor, without fire, in the gloom of a cell whose oblique airholeallowed only the cold breeze, but never the sun, to enter from without,she did not appear to suffer or even to think. One would have said thatshe had turned to stone with the cell, ice with the season. Her handswere clasped, her eyes fixed. At first sight one took her for a spectre;at the second, for a statue.Nevertheless, at intervals, her blue lips half opened to admit a breath,and trembled, but as dead and as mechanical as the leaves which the windsweeps aside.Nevertheless, from her dull eyes there escaped a look, an ineffablelook, a profound, lugubrious, imperturbable look, incessantly fixed upona corner of the cell which could not be seen from without; a gaze whichseemed to fix all the sombre thoughts of that soul in distress upon somemysterious object.Such was the creature who had received, from her habitation, the name ofthe recluse; and, from her garment, the name of the sacked nun.The three women, for Gervaise had rejoined Mahiette and Oudarde, gazedthrough the window. Their heads intercepted the feeble light in thecell, without the wretched being whom they thus deprived of it seemingto pay any attention to them. Do not let us trouble her, said Oudarde,in a low voice, she is in her ecstasy; she is praying.Meanwhile, Mahiette was gazing with everincreasing anxiety at that wan,withered, dishevelled head, and her eyes filled with tears. This isvery singular, she murmured.She thrust her head through the bars, and succeeded in casting a glanceat the corner where the gaze of the unhappy woman was immovably riveted.When she withdrew her head from the window, her countenance wasinundated with tears.What do you call that woman? she asked Oudarde.Oudarde replied,We call her Sister Gudule.And I, returned Mahiette, call her Paquette la Chantefleurie.Then, laying her finger on her lips, she motioned to the astoundedOudarde to thrust her head through the window and look.Oudarde looked and beheld, in the corner where the eyes of therecluse were fixed in that sombre ecstasy, a tiny shoe of pink satin,embroidered with a thousand fanciful designs in gold and silver.Gervaise looked after Oudarde, and then the three women, gazing upon theunhappy mother, began to weep.But neither their looks nor their tears disturbed the recluse. Her handsremained clasped; her lips mute; her eyes fixed; and that little shoe,thus gazed at, broke the heart of any one who knew her history.The three women had not yet uttered a single word; they dared not speak,even in a low voice. This deep silence, this deep grief, this profoundoblivion in which everything had disappeared except one thing, producedupon them the effect of the grand altar at Christmas or Easter. Theyremained silent, they meditated, they were ready to kneel. It seemed tothem that they were ready to enter a church on the day of Tenebrae.At length Gervaise, the most curious of the three, and consequently theleast sensitive, tried to make the recluse speak:Sister! Sister Gudule!She repeated this call three times, raising her voice each time. Therecluse did not move; not a word, not a glance, not a sigh, not a signof life.Oudarde, in her turn, in a sweeter, more caressing voice,Sister! said she, Sister SainteGudule!The same silence; the same immobility.A singular woman! exclaimed Gervaise, and one not to be moved by acatapult!Perchance she is deaf, said Oudarde.Perhaps she is blind, added Gervaise.Dead, perchance, returned Mahiette.It is certain that if the soul had not already quitted this inert,sluggish, lethargic body, it had at least retreated and concealed itselfin depths whither the perceptions of the exterior organs no longerpenetrated.Then we must leave the cake on the window, said Oudarde; some scampwill take it. What shall we do to rouse her?Eustache, who, up to that moment had been diverted by a little carriagedrawn by a large dog, which had just passed, suddenly perceived that histhree conductresses were gazing at something through the window, and,curiosity taking possession of him in his turn, he climbed upon a stonepost, elevated himself on tiptoe, and applied his fat, red face to theopening, shouting, Mother, let me see too!At the sound of this clear, fresh, ringing child voice, the reclusetrembled; she turned her head with the sharp, abrupt movement of a steelspring, her long, fleshless hands cast aside the hair from her brow,and she fixed upon the child, bitter, astonished, desperate eyes. Thisglance was but a lightning flash.Oh my God! she suddenly exclaimed, hiding her head on her knees, andit seemed as though her hoarse voice tore her chest as it passed fromit, do not show me those of others!Good day, madam, said the child, gravely.Nevertheless, this shock had, so to speak, awakened the recluse. A longshiver traversed her frame from head to foot; her teeth chattered; shehalf raised her head and said, pressing her elbows against her hips, andclasping her feet in her hands as though to warm them,Oh, how cold it is!Poor woman! said Oudarde, with great compassion, would you like alittle fire?She shook her head in token of refusal.Well, resumed Oudarde, presenting her with a flagon; here is somehippocras which will warm you; drink it.Again she shook her head, looked at Oudarde fixedly and replied,Water.Oudarde persisted,No, sister, that is no beverage for January. Youmust drink a little hippocras and eat this leavened cake of maize, whichwe have baked for you.She refused the cake which Mahiette offered to her, and said, Blackbread.Come, said Gervaise, seized in her turn with an impulse of charity,and unfastening her woolen cloak, here is a cloak which is a littlewarmer than yours.She refused the cloak as she had refused the flagon and the cake, andreplied, A sack.But, resumed the good Oudarde, you must have perceived to someextent, that yesterday was a festival.I do perceive it, said the recluse; tis two days now since I havehad any water in my crock.She added, after a silence, Tis a festival, I am forgotten. People dowell. Why should the world think of me, when I do not think of it? Coldcharcoal makes cold ashes.And as though fatigued with having said so much, she dropped her head onher knees again. The simple and charitable Oudarde, who fancied thatshe understood from her last words that she was complaining of the cold,replied innocently, Then you would like a little fire?Fire! said the sacked nun, with a strange accent; and will you alsomake a little for the poor little one who has been beneath the sod forthese fifteen years?Every limb was trembling, her voice quivered, her eyes flashed, she hadraised herself upon her knees; suddenly she extended her thin,white hand towards the child, who was regarding her with a look ofastonishment. Take away that child! she cried. The Egyptian woman isabout to pass by.Then she fell face downward on the earth, and her forehead struck thestone, with the sound of one stone against another stone. The threewomen thought her dead. A moment later, however, she moved, and theybeheld her drag herself, on her knees and elbows, to the corner wherethe little shoe was. Then they dared not look; they no longer saw her;but they heard a thousand kisses and a thousand sighs, mingled withheartrending cries, and dull blows like those of a head in contact witha wall. Then, after one of these blows, so violent that all three ofthem staggered, they heard no more.Can she have killed herself? said Gervaise, venturing to pass her headthrough the airhole. Sister! Sister Gudule!Sister Gudule! repeated Oudarde.Ah! good heavens! she no longer moves! resumed Gervaise; is she dead?Gudule! Gudule!Mahiette, choked to such a point that she could not speak, made aneffort. Wait, said she. Then bending towards the window, Paquette! she said, Paquette le Chantefleurie!A child who innocently blows upon the badly ignited fuse of a bomb, andmakes it explode in his face, is no more terrified than was Mahietteat the effect of that name, abruptly launched into the cell of SisterGudule.The recluse trembled all over, rose erect on her bare feet, and leapedat the window with eyes so glaring that Mahiette and Oudarde, and theother woman and the child recoiled even to the parapet of the quay.Meanwhile, the sinister face of the recluse appeared pressed to thegrating of the airhole. Oh! oh! she cried, with an appalling laugh;tis the Egyptian who is calling me!At that moment, a scene which was passing at the pillory caught her wildeye. Her brow contracted with horror, she stretched her two skeletonarms from her cell, and shrieked in a voice which resembled adeathrattle, So tis thou once more, daughter of Egypt! Tis thouwho callest me, stealer of children! Well! Be thou accursed! accursed!accursed! accursed!CHAPTER IV. A TEAR FOR A DROP OF WATER.These words were, so to speak, the point of union of two scenes, whichhad, up to that time, been developed in parallel lines at the samemoment, each on its particular theatre; one, that which the reader hasjust perused, in the RatHole; the other, which he is about to read, onthe ladder of the pillory. The first had for witnesses only the threewomen with whom the reader has just made acquaintance; the second hadfor spectators all the public which we have seen above, collecting onthe Place de Grève, around the pillory and the gibbet.That crowd which the four sergeants posted at nine o’clock in themorning at the four corners of the pillory had inspired with the hopeof some sort of an execution, no doubt, not a hanging, but a whipping,a cropping of ears, something, in short,that crowd had increased sorapidly that the four policemen, too closely besieged, had had occasionto press it, as the expression then ran, more than once, by soundblows of their whips, and the haunches of their horses.This populace, disciplined to waiting for public executions, did notmanifest very much impatience. It amused itself with watching thepillory, a very simple sort of monument, composed of a cube of masonryabout six feet high and hollow in the interior. A very steep staircase,of unhewn stone, which was called by distinction the ladder, led tothe upper platform, upon which was visible a horizontal wheel of solidoak. The victim was bound upon this wheel, on his knees, with his handsbehind his back. A wooden shaft, which set in motion a capstan concealedin the interior of the little edifice, imparted a rotatory motion tothe wheel, which always maintained its horizontal position, and in thismanner presented the face of the condemned man to all quarters of thesquare in succession. This was what was called turning a criminal.As the reader perceives, the pillory of the Grève was far frompresenting all the recreations of the pillory of the Halles. Nothingarchitectural, nothing monumental. No roof to the iron cross, nooctagonal lantern, no frail, slender columns spreading out on the edgeof the roof into capitals of acanthus leaves and flowers, no waterspoutsof chimeras and monsters, on carved woodwork, no fine sculpture, deeplysunk in the stone.They were forced to content themselves with those four stretches ofrubble work, backed with sandstone, and a wretched stone gibbet, meagreand bare, on one side.The entertainment would have been but a poor one for lovers of Gothicarchitecture. It is true that nothing was ever less curious on the scoreof architecture than the worthy gapers of the Middle Ages, and that theycared very little for the beauty of a pillory.The victim finally arrived, bound to the tail of a cart, and when he hadbeen hoisted upon the platform, where he could be seen from all pointsof the Place, bound with cords and straps upon the wheel of the pillory,a prodigious hoot, mingled with laughter and acclamations, burst forthupon the Place. They had recognized Quasimodo.It was he, in fact. The change was singular. Pilloried on the very placewhere, on the day before, he had been saluted, acclaimed, and proclaimedPope and Prince of Fools, in the cortege of the Duke of Egypt, the Kingof Thunes, and the Emperor of Galilee! One thing is certain, and thatis, that there was not a soul in the crowd, not even himself, though inturn triumphant and the sufferer, who set forth this combination clearlyin his thought. Gringoire and his philosophy were missing at thisspectacle.Soon Michel Noiret, sworn trumpeter to the king, our lord, imposedsilence on the louts, and proclaimed the sentence, in accordance withthe order and command of monsieur the provost. Then he withdrew behindthe cart, with his men in livery surcoats.Quasimodo, impassible, did not wince. All resistance had been renderedimpossible to him by what was then called, in the style of the criminalchancellery, the vehemence and firmness of the bonds which means thatthe thongs and chains probably cut into his flesh; moreover, it is atradition of jail and wardens, which has not been lost, and which thehandcuffs still preciously preserve among us, a civilized, gentle,humane people (the galleys and the guillotine in parentheses).He had allowed himself to be led, pushed, carried, lifted, bound,and bound again. Nothing was to be seen upon his countenance but theastonishment of a savage or an idiot. He was known to be deaf; one mighthave pronounced him to be blind.They placed him on his knees on the circular plank; he made noresistance. They removed his shirt and doublet as far as his girdle; heallowed them to have their way. They entangled him under a fresh systemof thongs and buckles; he allowed them to bind and buckle him. Only fromtime to time he snorted noisily, like a calf whose head is hanging andbumping over the edge of a butcher cart.The dolt, said Jehan Frollo of the Mill, to his friend RobinPoussepain (for the two students had followed the culprit, as was tohave been expected), he understands no more than a cockchafer shut upin a box!There was wild laughter among the crowd when they beheld Quasimodohump, his camel breast, his callous and hairy shoulders laid bare.During this gayety, a man in the livery of the city, short of statureand robust of mien, mounted the platform and placed himself near thevictim. His name speedily circulated among the spectators. It was MasterPierrat Torterue, official torturer to the Châtelet.He began by depositing on an angle of the pillory a black hourglass,the upper lobe of which was filled with red sand, which it allowedto glide into the lower receptacle; then he removed his particoloredsurtout, and there became visible, suspended from his right hand, athin and tapering whip of long, white, shining, knotted, plaited thongs,armed with metal nails. With his left hand, he negligently folded backhis shirt around his right arm, to the very armpit.In the meantime, Jehan Frollo, elevating his curly blonde head abovethe crowd (he had mounted upon the shoulders of Robin Poussepain for thepurpose), shouted: Come and look, gentle ladies and men! they aregoing to peremptorily flagellate Master Quasimodo, the bellringer ofmy brother, monsieur the archdeacon of Josas, a knave of orientalarchitecture, who has a back like a dome, and legs like twistedcolumns!And the crowd burst into a laugh, especially the boys and young girls.At length the torturer stamped his foot. The wheel began to turn.Quasimodo wavered beneath his bonds. The amazement which was suddenlydepicted upon his deformed face caused the bursts of laughter toredouble around him.All at once, at the moment when the wheel in its revolution presented toMaster Pierrat, the humped back of Quasimodo, Master Pierrat raised hisarm; the fine thongs whistled sharply through the air, like a handful ofadders, and fell with fury upon the wretch shoulders.Quasimodo leaped as though awakened with a start. He began tounderstand. He writhed in his bonds; a violent contraction of surpriseand pain distorted the muscles of his face, but he uttered not a singlesigh. He merely turned his head backward, to the right, then to theleft, balancing it as a bull does who has been stung in the flanks by agadfly.A second blow followed the first, then a third, and another and another,and still others. The wheel did not cease to turn, nor the blows to raindown.Soon the blood burst forth, and could be seen trickling in a thousandthreads down the hunchback black shoulders; and the slender thongs, intheir rotatory motion which rent the air, sprinkled drops of it upon thecrowd.Quasimodo had resumed, to all appearance, his first imperturbability. Hehad at first tried, in a quiet way and without much outward movement,to break his bonds. His eye had been seen to light up, his musclesto stiffen, his members to concentrate their force, and the strapsto stretch. The effort was powerful, prodigious, desperate; but theprovost seasoned bonds resisted. They cracked, and that was all.Quasimodo fell back exhausted. Amazement gave way, on his features, toa sentiment of profound and bitter discouragement. He closed his singleeye, allowed his head to droop upon his breast, and feigned death.From that moment forth, he stirred no more. Nothing could force amovement from him. Neither his blood, which did not cease to flow, northe blows which redoubled in fury, nor the wrath of the torturer, whogrew excited himself and intoxicated with the execution, nor the soundof the horrible thongs, more sharp and whistling than the claws ofscorpions.At length a bailiff from the Châtelet clad in black, mounted on a blackhorse, who had been stationed beside the ladder since the beginningof the execution, extended his ebony wand towards the hourglass. Thetorturer stopped. The wheel stopped. Quasimodo eye opened slowly.The scourging was finished. Two lackeys of the official torturer bathedthe bleeding shoulders of the patient, anointed them with some unguentwhich immediately closed all the wounds, and threw upon his back a sortof yellow vestment, in cut like a chasuble. In the meanwhile, PierratTorterue allowed the thongs, red and gorged with blood, to drip upon thepavement.All was not over for Quasimodo. He had still to undergo that hour ofpillory which Master Florian Barbedienne had so judiciously added to thesentence of Messire Robert d’Estouteville; all to the greater gloryof the old physiological and psychological play upon words of Jean deCumène, _Surdus absurdus_: a deaf man is absurd.So the hourglass was turned over once more, and they left the hunchbackfastened to the plank, in order that justice might be accomplished tothe very end.The populace, especially in the Middle Ages, is in society what thechild is in the family. As long as it remains in its state of primitiveignorance, of moral and intellectual minority, it can be said of it asof the child,  Tis the pitiless age.We have already shown that Quasimodo was generally hated, for more thanone good reason, it is true. There was hardly a spectator in that crowdwho had not or who did not believe that he had reason to complain of themalevolent hunchback of NotreDame. The joy at seeing him appear thusin the pillory had been universal; and the harsh punishment which he hadjust suffered, and the pitiful condition in which it had left him, farfrom softening the populace had rendered its hatred more malicious byarming it with a touch of mirth.Hence, the public prosecution satisfied, as the bigwigs of the lawstill express it in their jargon, the turn came of a thousand privatevengeances. Here, as in the Grand Hall, the women rendered themselvesparticularly prominent. All cherished some rancor against him, some forhis malice, others for his ugliness. The latter were the most furious.Oh! mask of Antichrist! said one.Rider on a broom handle! cried another.What a fine tragic grimace, howled a third, and who would make himPope of the Fools if today were yesterday?Tis well, struck in an old woman. This is the grimace of thepillory. When shall we have that of the gibbet?When will you be coiffed with your big bell a hundred feet underground, cursed bellringer?But tis the devil who rings the Angelus!Oh! the deaf man! the oneeyed creature! the hunchback! the monster!A face to make a woman miscarry better than all the drugs andmedicines!And the two scholars, Jehan du Moulin, and Robin Poussepain, sang at thetop of their lungs, the ancient refrain,  _Une hart  Pour le pendard!  Un fagot  Pour le magot_!    A rope for the gallows bird! A fagot for the ape.A thousand other insults rained down upon him, and hoots andimprecations, and laughter, and now and then, stones.Quasimodo was deaf but his sight was clear, and the public fury wasno less energetically depicted on their visages than in their words.Moreover, the blows from the stones explained the bursts of laughter.At first he held his ground. But little by little that patience whichhad borne up under the lash of the torturer, yielded and gave way beforeall these stings of insects. The bull of the Asturias who has been butlittle moved by the attacks of the picador grows irritated with the dogsand banderilleras.He first cast around a slow glance of hatred upon the crowd. But boundas he was, his glance was powerless to drive away those flies whichwere stinging his wound. Then he moved in his bonds, and his furiousexertions made the ancient wheel of the pillory shriek on its axle. Allthis only increased the derision and hooting.Then the wretched man, unable to break his collar, like that of achained wild beast, became tranquil once more; only at intervals a sighof rage heaved the hollows of his chest. There was neither shame norredness on his face. He was too far from the state of society, and toonear the state of nature to know what shame was. Moreover, with sucha degree of deformity, is infamy a thing that can be felt? But wrath,hatred, despair, slowly lowered over that hideous visage a cloudwhich grew ever more and more sombre, ever more and more charged withelectricity, which burst forth in a thousand lightning flashes from theeye of the cyclops.Nevertheless, that cloud cleared away for a moment, at the passage ofa mule which traversed the crowd, bearing a priest. As far away ashe could see that mule and that priest, the poor victim visage grewgentler. The fury which had contracted it was followed by a strangesmile full of ineffable sweetness, gentleness, and tenderness. Inproportion as the priest approached, that smile became more clear, moredistinct, more radiant. It was like the arrival of a Saviour, which theunhappy man was greeting. But as soon as the mule was near enough to thepillory to allow of its rider recognizing the victim, the priest droppedhis eyes, beat a hasty retreat, spurred on rigorously, as though inhaste to rid himself of humiliating appeals, and not at all desirous ofbeing saluted and recognized by a poor fellow in such a predicament.This priest was Archdeacon Dom Claude Frollo.The cloud descended more blackly than ever upon Quasimodo brow. Thesmile was still mingled with it for a time, but was bitter, discouraged,profoundly sad.Time passed on. He had been there at least an hour and a half,lacerated, maltreated, mocked incessantly, and almost stoned.All at once he moved again in his chains with redoubled despair, whichmade the whole framework that bore him tremble, and, breaking thesilence which he had obstinately preserved hitherto, he cried in ahoarse and furious voice, which resembled a bark rather than a humancry, and which was drowned in the noise of the hootsDrink!This exclamation of distress, far from exciting compassion, only addedamusement to the good Parisian populace who surrounded the ladder, andwho, it must be confessed, taken in the mass and as a multitude, wasthen no less cruel and brutal than that horrible tribe of robbers amongwhom we have already conducted the reader, and which was simply thelower stratum of the populace. Not a voice was raised around the unhappyvictim, except to jeer at his thirst. It is certain that at that momenthe was more grotesque and repulsive than pitiable, with his face purpleand dripping, his eye wild, his mouth foaming with rage and pain, andhis tongue lolling half out. It must also be stated that if a charitablesoul of a bourgeois or _bourgeoise_, in the rabble, had attempted tocarry a glass of water to that wretched creature in torment, therereigned around the infamous steps of the pillory such a prejudice ofshame and ignominy, that it would have sufficed to repulse the goodSamaritan.At the expiration of a few moments, Quasimodo cast a desperate glanceupon the crowd, and repeated in a voice still more heartrending:Drink!And all began to laugh.Drink this! cried Robin Poussepain, throwing in his face a spongewhich had been soaked in the gutter. There, you deaf villain, I’m yourdebtor.A woman hurled a stone at his head,That will teach you to wake us up at night with your peal of a dammedsoul.He, good, my son! howled a cripple, making an effort to reach him withhis crutch, will you cast any more spells on us from the top of thetowers of NotreDame?Here a drinking cup! chimed in a man, flinging a broken jug at hisbreast. Twas you that made my wife, simply because she passed nearyou, give birth to a child with two heads!And my cat bring forth a kitten with six paws! yelped an old crone,launching a brick at him.Drink! repeated Quasimodo panting, and for the third time.At that moment he beheld the crowd give way. A young girl, fantasticallydressed, emerged from the throng. She was accompanied by a little whitegoat with gilded horns, and carried a tambourine in her hand.Quasimodo eyes sparkled. It was the gypsy whom he had attempted tocarry off on the preceding night, a misdeed for which he was dimlyconscious that he was being punished at that very moment; which wasnot in the least the case, since he was being chastised only for themisfortune of being deaf, and of having been judged by a deaf man. Hedoubted not that she had come to wreak her vengeance also, and to dealher blow like the rest.He beheld her, in fact, mount the ladder rapidly. Wrath and spitesuffocate him. He would have liked to make the pillory crumble intoruins, and if the lightning of his eye could have dealt death, the gypsywould have been reduced to powder before she reached the platform.She approached, without uttering a syllable, the victim who writhed ina vain effort to escape her, and detaching a gourd from her girdle, sheraised it gently to the parched lips of the miserable man.Then, from that eye which had been, up to that moment, so dry andburning, a big tear was seen to fall, and roll slowly down that deformedvisage so long contracted with despair. It was the first, in allprobability, that the unfortunate man had ever shed.Meanwhile, he had forgotten to drink. The gypsy made her little pout,from impatience, and pressed the spout to the tusked month of Quasimodo,with a smile.He drank with deep draughts. His thirst was burning.When he had finished, the wretch protruded his black lips, no doubt,with the object of kissing the beautiful hand which had just succouredhim. But the young girl, who was, perhaps, somewhat distrustful, and whoremembered the violent attempt of the night, withdrew her hand with thefrightened gesture of a child who is afraid of being bitten by a beast.Then the poor deaf man fixed on her a look full of reproach andinexpressible sadness.It would have been a touching spectacle anywhere,this beautiful,fresh, pure, and charming girl, who was at the same time so weak, thushastening to the relief of so much misery, deformity, and malevolence.On the pillory, the spectacle was sublime.The very populace were captivated by it, and began to clap their hands,crying,Noel! Noel!It was at that moment that the recluse caught sight, from the window ofher bole, of the gypsy on the pillory, and hurled at her her sinisterimprecation,Accursed be thou, daughter of Egypt! Accursed! accursed!CHAPTER V. END OF THE STORY OF THE CAKE.La Esmeralda turned pale and descended from the pillory, staggering asshe went. The voice of the recluse still pursued her,Descend! descend! Thief of Egypt! thou shalt ascend it once more!The sacked nun is in one of her tantrums, muttered the populace;and that was the end of it. For that sort of woman was feared; whichrendered them sacred. People did not then willingly attack one whoprayed day and night.The hour had arrived for removing Quasimodo. He was unbound, the crowddispersed.Near the Grand Pont, Mahiette, who was returning with her twocompanions, suddenly halted,By the way, Eustache! what did you do with that cake?Mother, said the child, while you were talking with that lady in thebole, a big dog took a bite of my cake, and then I bit it also.What, sir, did you eat the whole of it? she went on.Mother, it was the dog. I told him, but he would not listen to me. ThenI bit into it, also.Tis a terrible child! said the mother, smiling and scolding at oneand the same time. Do you see, Oudarde? He already eats all the fruitfrom the cherrytree in our orchard of Charlerange. So his grandfathersays that he will be a captain. Just let me catch you at it again,Master Eustache. Come along, you greedy fellow!            End of Volume 1.VOLUME II.TABLE OF CONTENTS.BOOK SEVENTH. I. The Danger of Confiding One Secret to a Goat II. APriest and a Philosopher are two Different Things III. The Bells IV._ANANKE_ V. The Two Men Clothed in Black VI. The Effect which SevenOaths in the Open Air can Produce VII. The Mysterious Monk VIII. TheUtility of Windows which Open on the RiverBOOK EIGHTH. I. The Crown Changed into a Dry Leaf II. Continuation ofthe Crown which was Changed into a Dry Leaf III. End of the Crown whichwas Changed into a Dry Leaf IV. _Lasciate Ogni Speranza_Leave allhope behind, ye who Enter here V. The Mother VI. Three Human Heartsdifferently ConstructedBOOK NINTH. I. Delirium II. Hunchbacked, One Eyed, Lame III. Deaf IV.Earthenware and Crystal V. The Key to the Red Door VI. Continuation ofthe Key to the Red DoorBOOK TENTH. I. Gringoire has Many Good Ideas in Succession.Rue desBernardins II. Turn Vagabond III. Long Live Mirth IV. An Awkward FriendV. The Retreat in which Monsieur Louis of France says his Prayers VI.Little Sword in Pocket VII. Chateaupers to the RescueBOOK ELEVENTH.I. The Little Shoe II. The Beautiful Creature Clad in White III. TheMarriage of Pinnbus IV. The Marriage of QuasimodoNote added toDefinitive EditionCHAPTER I. THE DANGER OF CONFIDING ONE SECRET TO A GOAT.Many weeks had elapsed.The first of March had arrived. The sun, which Dubartas, that classicancestor of periphrase, had not yet dubbed the Grandduke of Candles, was none the less radiant and joyous on that account. It was one ofthose spring days which possesses so much sweetness and beauty, that allParis turns out into the squares and promenades and celebrates themas though they were Sundays. In those days of brilliancy, warmth, andserenity, there is a certain hour above all others, when the façade ofNotreDame should be admired. It is the moment when the sun, alreadydeclining towards the west, looks the cathedral almost full in the face.Its rays, growing more and more horizontal, withdraw slowly from thepavement of the square, and mount up the perpendicular façade, whosethousand bosses in high relief they cause to start out from the shadows,while the great central rose window flames like the eye of a cyclops,inflamed with the reflections of the forge.This was the hour.Opposite the lofty cathedral, reddened by the setting sun, on the stonebalcony built above the porch of a rich Gothic house, which formed theangle of the square and the Rue du Parvis, several young girls werelaughing and chatting with every sort of grace and mirth. From thelength of the veil which fell from their pointed coif, twined withpearls, to their heels, from the fineness of the embroidered chemisettewhich covered their shoulders and allowed a glimpse, according to thepleasing custom of the time, of the swell of their fair virgin bosoms,from the opulence of their underpetticoats still more precious thantheir overdress (marvellous refinement), from the gauze, the silk,the velvet, with which all this was composed, and, above all, from thewhiteness of their hands, which certified to their leisure and idleness,it was easy to divine they were noble and wealthy heiresses. They were,in fact, Damoiselle FleurdeLys de Gondelaurier and her companions,Diane de Christeuil, Amelotte de Montmichel, Colombe de Gaillefontaine,and the little de Champchevrier maiden; all damsels of good birth,assembled at that moment at the house of the dame widow de Gondelaurier,on account of Monseigneur de Beaujeu and Madame his wife, who were tocome to Paris in the month of April, there to choose maids of honor forthe Dauphiness Marguerite, who was to be received in Picardy from thehands of the Flemings. Now, all the squires for twenty leagues aroundwere intriguing for this favor for their daughters, and a goodly numberof the latter had been already brought or sent to Paris. These fourmaidens had been confided to the discreet and venerable charge ofMadame Aloise de Gondelaurier, widow of a former commander of the kingcrossbowmen, who had retired with her only daughter to her house in thePlace du Parvis, NotreDame, in Paris.The balcony on which these young girls stood opened from a chamberrichly tapestried in fawncolored Flanders leather, stamped with goldenfoliage. The beams, which cut the ceiling in parallel lines, divertedthe eye with a thousand eccentric painted and gilded carvings. Splendidenamels gleamed here and there on carved chests; a boar head infaience crowned a magnificent dresser, whose two shelves announced thatthe mistress of the house was the wife or widow of a knight banneret. Atthe end of the room, by the side of a lofty chimney blazoned witharms from top to bottom, in a rich red velvet armchair, sat Dame deGondelaurier, whose five and fifty years were written upon her garmentsno less distinctly than upon her face.Beside her stood a young man of imposing mien, although partakingsomewhat of vanity and bravadoone of those handsome fellows whom allwomen agree to admire, although grave men learned in physiognomy shrugtheir shoulders at them. This young man wore the garb of a captain ofthe king unattached archers, which bears far too much resemblance tothe costume of Jupiter, which the reader has already been enabled toadmire in the first book of this history, for us to inflict upon him asecond description.The damoiselles were seated, a part in the chamber, a part in thebalcony, some on square cushions of Utrecht velvet with golden corners,others on stools of oak carved in flowers and figures. Each of them heldon her knee a section of a great needlework tapestry, on which theywere working in company, while one end of it lay upon the rush mat whichcovered the floor.They were chatting together in that whispering tone and with thehalfstifled laughs peculiar to an assembly of young girls in whosemidst there is a young man. The young man whose presence served to setin play all these feminine selfconceits, appeared to pay very littleheed to the matter, and, while these pretty damsels were vying with oneanother to attract his attention, he seemed to be chiefly absorbed inpolishing the buckle of his sword belt with his doeskin glove. From timeto time, the old lady addressed him in a very low tone, and hereplied as well as he was able, with a sort of awkward and constrainedpoliteness.From the smiles and significant gestures of Dame Aloise, from theglances which she threw towards her daughter, FleurdeLys, as she spokelow to the captain, it was easy to see that there was here a question ofsome betrothal concluded, some marriage near at hand no doubt, betweenthe young man and FleurdeLys. From the embarrassed coldness of theofficer, it was easy to see that on his side, at least, love hadno longer any part in the matter. His whole air was expressive ofconstraint and weariness, which our lieutenants of the garrison wouldtoday translate admirably as, What a beastly bore!The poor dame, very much infatuated with her daughter, like any othersilly mother, did not perceive the officer lack of enthusiasm, andstrove in low tones to call his attention to the infinite grace withwhich FleurdeLys used her needle or wound her skein.Come, little cousin, she said to him, plucking him by the sleeve, inorder to speak in his ear, Look at her, do! see her stoop.Yes, truly, replied the young man, and fell back into his glacial andabsentminded silence.A moment later, he was obliged to bend down again, and Dame Aloise saidto him,Have you ever beheld a more gay and charming face than that of yourbetrothed? Can one be more white and blonde? are not her hands perfect?and that neckdoes it not assume all the curves of the swan inravishing fashion? How I envy you at times! and how happy you are to bea man, naughty libertine that you are! Is not my FleurdeLys adorablybeautiful, and are you not desperately in love with her?Of course, he replied, still thinking of something else.But do say something, said Madame Aloise, suddenly giving his shouldera push; you have grown very timid.We can assure our readers that timidity was neither the captain virtuenor his defect. But he made an effort to do what was demanded of him.Fair cousin, he said, approaching FleurdeLys, what is the subjectof this tapestry work which you are fashioning? Fair cousin, responded FleurdeLys, in an offended tone, I have already told youthree times. Tis the grotto of Neptune.It was evident that FleurdeLys saw much more clearly than her motherthrough the captain cold and absentminded manner. He felt thenecessity of making some conversation.And for whom is this Neptunerie destined?For the Abbey of SaintAntoine des Champs, answered FleurdeLys,without raising her eyes.The captain took up a corner of the tapestry.Who, my fair cousin, is this big gendarme, who is puffing out hischeeks to their full extent and blowing a trumpet?Tis Triton, she replied.There was a rather pettish intonation in FleurdeLyslaconic words.The young man understood that it was indispensable that he shouldwhisper something in her ear, a commonplace, a gallant compliment, nomatter what. Accordingly he bent down, but he could find nothing in hisimagination more tender and personal than this,Why does your mother always wear that surcoat with armorial designs,like our grandmothers of the time of Charles VII.? Tell her, faircousin, that tis no longer the fashion, and that the hinge (gond)and the laurel (laurier) embroidered on her robe give her the air ofa walking mantlepiece. In truth, people no longer sit thus on theirbanners, I assure you.FleurdeLys raised her beautiful eyes, full of reproach, Is that allof which you can assure me? she said, in a low voice.In the meantime, Dame Aloise, delighted to see them thus bending towardseach other and whispering, said as she toyed with the clasps of herprayerbook,Touching picture of love!The captain, more and more embarrassed, fell back upon the subject ofthe tapestry,Tis, in sooth, a charming work! he exclaimed.Whereupon Colombe de Gaillefontaine, another beautiful blonde, with awhite skin, dressed to the neck in blue damask, ventured a timid remarkwhich she addressed to FleurdeLys, in the hope that the handsomecaptain would reply to it, My dear Gondelaurier, have you seen thetapestries of the Hôtel de la RocheGuyon?Is not that the hotel in which is enclosed the garden of the Lingèredu Louvre? asked Diane de Christeuil with a laugh; for she had handsometeeth, and consequently laughed on every occasion.And where there is that big, old tower of the ancient wall of Paris, added Amelotte de Montmichel, a pretty fresh and curlyheaded brunette,who had a habit of sighing just as the other laughed, without knowingwhy.My dear Colombe, interpolated Dame Aloise, do you not mean the hotelwhich belonged to Monsieur de Bacqueville, in the reign of King CharlesVI.? there are indeed many superb high warp tapestries there.Charles VI.! Charles VI.! muttered the young captain, twirling hismoustache. Good heavens! what old things the good dame does remember!Madame de Gondelaurier continued, Fine tapestries, in truth. A work soesteemed that it passes as unrivalled.At that moment Bérangère de Champchevrier, a slender little maid ofseven years, who was peering into the square through the trefoils ofthe balcony, exclaimed, Oh! look, fair Godmother FleurdeLys, at thatpretty dancer who is dancing on the pavement and playing the tambourinein the midst of the loutish bourgeois!The sonorous vibration of a tambourine was, in fact, audible. Somegypsy from Bohemia, said FleurdeLys, turning carelessly toward thesquare.Look! look! exclaimed her lively companions; and they all ran to theedge of the balcony, while FleurdeLys, rendered thoughtful by thecoldness of her betrothed, followed them slowly, and the latter,relieved by this incident, which put an end to an embarrassingconversation, retreated to the farther end of the room, with thesatisfied air of a soldier released from duty. Nevertheless, thefair FleurdeLys was a charming and noble service, and such it hadformerly appeared to him; but the captain had gradually become blase’;the prospect of a speedy marriage cooled him more every day. Moreover,he was of a fickle disposition, and, must we say it, rather vulgar intaste. Although of very noble birth, he had contracted in his officialharness more than one habit of the common trooper. The tavern and itsaccompaniments pleased him. He was only at his ease amid gross language,military gallantries, facile beauties, and successes yet more easy.He had, nevertheless, received from his family some education and somepoliteness of manner; but he had been thrown on the world too young, hehad been in garrison at too early an age, and every day the polish ofa gentleman became more and more effaced by the rough friction of hisgendarme crossbelt. While still continuing to visit her from time totime, from a remnant of common respect, he felt doubly embarrassed withFleurdeLys; in the first place, because, in consequence of havingscattered his love in all sorts of places, he had reserved very littlefor her; in the next place, because, amid so many stiff, formal, anddecent ladies, he was in constant fear lest his mouth, habituated tooaths, should suddenly take the bit in its teeth, and break out into thelanguage of the tavern. The effect can be imagined!Moreover, all this was mingled in him, with great pretentions toelegance, toilet, and a fine appearance. Let the reader reconcile thesethings as best he can. I am simply the historian.He had remained, therefore, for several minutes, leaning in silenceagainst the carved jamb of the chimney, and thinking or not thinking,when FleurdeLys suddenly turned and addressed him. After all, the pooryoung girl was pouting against the dictates of her heart.Fair cousin, did you not speak to us of a little Bohemian whom yousaved a couple of months ago, while making the patrol with the watch atnight, from the hands of a dozen robbers?I believe so, fair cousin, said the captain.Well, she resumed, perchance tis that same gypsy girl who is dancingyonder, on the church square. Come and see if you recognize her, fairCousin Phoebus.A secret desire for reconciliation was apparent in this gentleinvitation which she gave him to approach her, and in the care which shetook to call him by name. Captain Phoebus de Châteaupers (for it ishe whom the reader has had before his eyes since the beginning of thischapter) slowly approached the balcony. Stay, said FleurdeLys,laying her hand tenderly on Phoebus arm; look at that little girlyonder, dancing in that circle. Is she your Bohemian?Phoebus looked, and said,Yes, I recognize her by her goat.Oh! in fact, what a pretty little goat! said Amelotte, clasping herhands in admiration.Are his horns of real gold? inquired Bérangère.Without moving from her armchair, Dame Aloise interposed, Is she notone of those gypsy girls who arrived last year by the Gibard gate?Madame my mother, said FleurdeLys gently, that gate is now calledthe Porte d’Enfer.Mademoiselle de Gondelaurier knew how her mother antiquated mode ofspeech shocked the captain. In fact, he began to sneer, and mutteredbetween his teeth: Porte Gibard! Porte Gibard! Tis enough to make KingCharles VI. pass by.Godmother! exclaimed Bérangère, whose eyes, incessantly in motion, hadsuddenly been raised to the summit of the towers of NotreDame, who isthat black man up yonder?All the young girls raised their eyes. A man was, in truth, leaningon the balustrade which surmounted the northern tower, looking on theGrève. He was a priest. His costume could be plainly discerned, and hisface resting on both his hands. But he stirred no more than if he hadbeen a statue. His eyes, intently fixed, gazed into the Place.It was something like the immobility of a bird of prey, who has justdiscovered a nest of sparrows, and is gazing at it.Tis monsieur the archdeacon of Josas, said FleurdeLys.You have good eyes if you can recognize him from here, said theGaillefontaine.How he is staring at the little dancer! went on Diane de Christeuil.Let the gypsy beware! said FleurdeLys, for he loves not Egypt.Tis a great shame for that man to look upon her thus, added Amelottede Montmichel, for she dances delightfully.Fair cousin Phoebus, said FleurdeLys suddenly, Since you know thislittle gypsy, make her a sign to come up here. It will amuse us.Oh, yes! exclaimed all the young girls, clapping their hands.Why! tis not worth while, replied Phoebus. She has forgotten me, nodoubt, and I know not so much as her name. Nevertheless, as you wish it,young ladies, I will make the trial. And leaning over the balustrade ofthe balcony, he began to shout, Little one!The dancer was not beating her tambourine at the moment. She turned herhead towards the point whence this call proceeded, her brilliant eyesrested on Phoebus, and she stopped short.Little one! repeated the captain; and he beckoned her to approach.The young girl looked at him again, then she blushed as though a flamehad mounted into her cheeks, and, taking her tambourine under her arm,she made her way through the astonished spectators towards the door ofthe house where Phoebus was calling her, with slow, tottering steps, andwith the troubled look of a bird which is yielding to the fascination ofa serpent.A moment later, the tapestry portière was raised, and the gypsy appearedon the threshold of the chamber, blushing, confused, breathless, herlarge eyes drooping, and not daring to advance another step.Bérangère clapped her hands.Meanwhile, the dancer remained motionless upon the threshold. Herappearance had produced a singular effect upon these young girls. Itis certain that a vague and indistinct desire to please the handsomeofficer animated them all, that his splendid uniform was the target ofall their coquetries, and that from the moment he presented himself,there existed among them a secret, suppressed rivalry, which they hardlyacknowledged even to themselves, but which broke forth, none the less,every instant, in their gestures and remarks. Nevertheless, as they wereall very nearly equal in beauty, they contended with equal arms, andeach could hope for the victory.The arrival of the gypsy suddenlydestroyed this equilibrium. Her beauty was so rare, that, at the momentwhen she appeared at the entrance of the apartment, it seemed as thoughshe diffused a sort of light which was peculiar to herself. In thatnarrow chamber, surrounded by that sombre frame of hangings andwoodwork, she was incomparably more beautiful and more radiant than onthe public square. She was like a torch which has suddenly been broughtfrom broad daylight into the dark. The noble damsels were dazzled by herin spite of themselves. Each one felt herself, in some sort, woundedin her beauty. Hence, their battle front (may we be allowed theexpression,) was immediately altered, although they exchanged not asingle word. But they understood each other perfectly. Women instinctscomprehend and respond to each other more quickly than the intelligencesof men. An enemy had just arrived; all felt itall rallied together.One drop of wine is sufficient to tinge a glass of water red; to diffusea certain degree of ill temper throughout a whole assembly of prettywomen, the arrival of a prettier woman suffices, especially when thereis but one man present.Hence the welcome accorded to the gypsy was marvellously glacial. Theysurveyed her from head to foot, then exchanged glances, and all wassaid; they understood each other. Meanwhile, the young girl was waitingto be spoken to, in such emotion that she dared not raise her eyelids.The captain was the first to break the silence. Upon my word, saidhe, in his tone of intrepid fatuity, here is a charming creature! Whatthink you of her, fair cousin?This remark, which a more delicate admirer would have uttered in a lowertone, at least was not of a nature to dissipate the feminine jealousieswhich were on the alert before the gypsy.FleurdeLys replied to the captain with a bland affectation ofdisdain;Not bad.The others whispered.At length, Madame Aloise, who was not the less jealous because she wasso for her daughter, addressed the dancer,Approach, little one.Approach, little one! repeated, with comical dignity, littleBérangère, who would have reached about as high as her hips.The gypsy advanced towards the noble dame.Fair child, said Phoebus, with emphasis, taking several steps towardsher, I do not know whether I have the supreme honor of being recognizedby you.She interrupted him, with a smile and a look full of infinitesweetness,Oh! yes, said she.She has a good memory, remarked FleurdeLys.Come, now, resumed Phoebus, you escaped nimbly the other evening. DidI frighten you!Oh! no, said the gypsy.There was in the intonation of that Oh! no, uttered after that Oh!yes, an ineffable something which wounded FleurdeLys.You left me in your stead, my beauty, pursued the captain, whosetongue was unloosed when speaking to a girl out of the street, acrabbed knave, oneeyed and hunchbacked, the bishop bellringer,I believe. I have been told that by birth he is the bastard ofan archdeacon and a devil. He has a pleasant name: he is called_QuatreTemps_ (Ember Days), _PaquesFleuries_ (Palm Sunday), MardiGras(Shrove Tuesday), I know not what! The name of some festival when thebells are pealed! So he took the liberty of carrying you off, as thoughyou were made for beadles! Tis too much. What the devil did thatscreechowl want with you? Hey, tell me!I do not know, she replied.The inconceivable impudence! A bellringer carrying off a wench, like avicomte! a lout poaching on the game of gentlemen! that is a rare pieceof assurance. However, he paid dearly for it. Master Pierrat Torterue isthe harshest groom that ever curried a knave; and I can tell you, ifit will be agreeable to you, that your bellringer hide got a thoroughdressing at his hands.Poor man! said the gypsy, in whom these words revived the memory ofthe pillory.The captain burst out laughing.Cornedeboeuf! here pity as well placed as a feather in a pigtail! May I have as big a belly as a pope, ifHe stopped short. Pardon me, ladies; I believe that I was on the pointof saying something foolish.Fie, sir said la Gaillefontaine.He talks to that creature in her own tongue! added FleurdeLys, ina low tone, her irritation increasing every moment. This irritation wasnot diminished when she beheld the captain, enchanted with the gypsy,and, most of all, with himself, execute a pirouette on his heel,repeating with coarse, naïve, and soldierly gallantry,A handsome wench, upon my soul!Rather savagely dressed, said Diane de Christeuil, laughing to showher fine teeth.This remark was a flash of light to the others. Not being able to impugnher beauty, they attacked her costume.That is true, said la Montmichel; what makes you run about thestreets thus, without guimpe or ruff?That petticoat is so short that it makes one tremble, added laGaillefontaine.My dear, continued FleurdeLys, with decided sharpness, You will getyourself taken up by the sumptuary police for your gilded girdle.Little one, little one; resumed la Christeuil, with an implacablesmile, if you were to put respectable sleeves upon your arms they wouldget less sunburned.It was, in truth, a spectacle worthy of a more intelligent spectatorthan Phoebus, to see how these beautiful maidens, with their envenomedand angry tongues, wound, serpentlike, and glided and writhed aroundthe street dancer. They were cruel and graceful; they searched andrummaged maliciously in her poor and silly toilet of spangles andtinsel. There was no end to their laughter, irony, and humiliation.Sarcasms rained down upon the gypsy, and haughty condescension andmalevolent looks. One would have thought they were young Roman damesthrusting golden pins into the breast of a beautiful slave. One wouldhave pronounced them elegant grayhounds, circling, with inflatednostrils, round a poor woodland fawn, whom the glance of their masterforbade them to devour.After all, what was a miserable dancer on the public squares in thepresence of these highborn maidens? They seemed to take no heed of herpresence, and talked of her aloud, to her face, as of something unclean,abject, and yet, at the same time, passably pretty.The gypsy was not insensible to these pinpricks. From time to time aflush of shame, a flash of anger inflamed her eyes or her cheeks; withdisdain she made that little grimace with which the reader is alreadyfamiliar, but she remained motionless; she fixed on Phoebus a sad,sweet, resigned look. There was also happiness and tenderness in thatgaze. One would have said that she endured for fear of being expelled.Phoebus laughed, and took the gypsy part with a mixture ofimpertinence and pity.Let them talk, little one! he repeated, jingling his golden spurs. Nodoubt your toilet is a little extravagant and wild, but what differencedoes that make with such a charming damsel as yourself?Good gracious! exclaimed the blonde Gaillefontaine, drawing up herswanlike throat, with a bitter smile. I see that messieurs the archersof the king police easily take fire at the handsome eyes of gypsies!Why not? said Phoebus.At this reply uttered carelessly by the captain, like a stray stone,whose fall one does not even watch, Colombe began to laugh, as well asDiane, Amelotte, and FleurdeLys, into whose eyes at the same time atear started.The gypsy, who had dropped her eyes on the floor at the words of Colombede Gaillefontaine, raised them beaming with joy and pride and fixed themonce more on Phoebus. She was very beautiful at that moment.The old dame, who was watching this scene, felt offended, withoutunderstanding why.Holy Virgin! she suddenly exclaimed, what is it moving about my legs?Ah! the villanous beast!It was the goat, who had just arrived, in search of his mistress, andwho, in dashing towards the latter, had begun by entangling his horns inthe pile of stuffs which the noble dame garments heaped up on her feetwhen she was seated.This created a diversion. The gypsy disentangled his horns withoututtering a word.Oh! here the little goat with golden hoofs! exclaimed Bérangère,dancing with joy.The gypsy crouched down on her knees and leaned her cheek against thefondling head of the goat. One would have said that she was askingpardon for having quitted it thus.Meanwhile, Diane had bent down to Colombe ear.Ah! good heavens! why did not I think of that sooner? Tis the gypsywith the goat. They say she is a sorceress, and that her goat executesvery miraculous tricks.Well! said Colombe, the goat must now amuse us in its turn, andperform a miracle for us.Diane and Colombe eagerly addressed the gypsy.Little one, make your goat perform a miracle.I do not know what you mean, replied the dancer.A miracle, a piece of magic, a bit of sorcery, in short.I do not understand. And she fell to caressing the pretty animal,repeating, Djali! Djali!At that moment FleurdeLys noticed a little bag of embroidered leathersuspended from the neck of the goat,What is that? she asked of thegypsy.The gypsy raised her large eyes upon her and replied gravely,That ismy secret.I should really like to know what your secret is, thoughtFleurdeLys.Meanwhile, the good dame had risen angrily,Come now, gypsy, ifneither you nor your goat can dance for us, what are you doing here?The gypsy walked slowly towards the door, without making any reply.But the nearer she approached it, the more her pace slackened. Anirresistible magnet seemed to hold her. Suddenly she turned her eyes,wet with tears, towards Phoebus, and halted.True God! exclaimed the captain, that not the way to depart. Comeback and dance something for us. By the way, my sweet love, what is yourname?La Esmeralda, said the dancer, never taking her eyes from him.At this strange name, a burst of wild laughter broke from the younggirls.Here a terrible name for a young lady, said Diane.You see well enough, retorted Amelotte, that she is an enchantress.My dear, exclaimed Dame Aloise solemnly, your parents did not committhe sin of giving you that name at the baptismal font.In the meantime, several minutes previously, Bérangère had coaxed thegoat into a corner of the room with a marchpane cake, without any onehaving noticed her. In an instant they had become good friends. Thecurious child had detached the bag from the goat neck, had openedit, and had emptied out its contents on the rush matting; it was analphabet, each letter of which was separately inscribed on a tiny blockof boxwood. Hardly had these playthings been spread out on the matting,when the child, with surprise, beheld the goat (one of whose miracles this was no doubt), draw out certain letters with its golden hoof, andarrange them, with gentle pushes, in a certain order. In a moment theyconstituted a word, which the goat seemed to have been trained to write,so little hesitation did it show in forming it, and Bérangère suddenlyexclaimed, clasping her hands in admiration,Godmother FleurdeLys, see what the goat has just done!FleurdeLys ran up and trembled. The letters arranged upon the floorformed this word,     PHOEBUS.Was it the goat who wrote that? she inquired in a changed voice.Yes, godmother, replied Bérangêre.It was impossible to doubt it; the child did not know how to write.This is the secret! thought FleurdeLys.Meanwhile, at the child exclamation, all had hastened up, the mother,the young girls, the gypsy, and the officer.The gypsy beheld the piece of folly which the goat had committed. Sheturned red, then pale, and began to tremble like a culprit before thecaptain, who gazed at her with a smile of satisfaction and amazement.Phoebus! whispered the young girls, stupefied: tis the captainname!You have a marvellous memory! said FleurdeLys, to the petrifiedgypsy. Then, bursting into sobs: Oh! she stammered mournfully, hidingher face in both her beautiful hands, she is a magician! And sheheard another and a still more bitter voice at the bottom of her heart,saying,She is a rival!She fell fainting.My daughter! my daughter! cried the terrified mother. Begone, yougypsy of hell!In a twinkling, La Esmeralda gathered up the unlucky letters, made asign to Djali, and went out through one door, while FleurdeLys wasbeing carried out through the other.Captain Phoebus, on being left alone, hesitated for a moment between thetwo doors, then he followed the gypsy.CHAPTER II. A PRIEST AND A PHILOSOPHER ARE TWO DIFFERENT THINGS.The priest whom the young girls had observed at the top of the Northtower, leaning over the Place and so attentive to the dance of thegypsy, was, in fact, Archdeacon Claude Frollo.Our readers have not forgotten the mysterious cell which the archdeaconhad reserved for himself in that tower. (I do not know, by the way beit said, whether it be not the same, the interior of which can be seentoday through a little square window, opening to the east at the heightof a man above the platform from which the towers spring; a bare anddilapidated den, whose badly plastered walls are ornamented hereand there, at the present day, with some wretched yellow engravingsrepresenting the façades of cathedrals. I presume that this hole isjointly inhabited by bats and spiders, and that, consequently, it wagesa double war of extermination on the flies).Every day, an hour before sunset, the archdeacon ascended the staircaseto the tower, and shut himself up in this cell, where he sometimespassed whole nights. That day, at the moment when, standing before thelow door of his retreat, he was fitting into the lock the complicatedlittle key which he always carried about him in the purse suspended tohis side, a sound of tambourine and castanets had reached his ear. Thesesounds came from the Place du Parvis. The cell, as we have already said,had only one window opening upon the rear of the church. Claude Frollohad hastily withdrawn the key, and an instant later, he was on the topof the tower, in the gloomy and pensive attitude in which the maidenshad seen him.There he stood, grave, motionless, absorbed in one look and one thought.All Paris lay at his feet, with the thousand spires of its edifices andits circular horizon of gentle hillswith its river winding under itsbridges, and its people moving to and fro through its streets,withthe clouds of its smoke,with the mountainous chain of its roofs whichpresses NotreDame in its doubled folds; but out of all the city,the archdeacon gazed at one corner only of the pavement, the Place duParvis; in all that throng at but one figure,the gypsy.It would have been difficult to say what was the nature of this look,and whence proceeded the flame that flashed from it. It was a fixedgaze, which was, nevertheless, full of trouble and tumult. And, from theprofound immobility of his whole body, barely agitated at intervalsby an involuntary shiver, as a tree is moved by the wind; from thestiffness of his elbows, more marble than the balustrade on whichthey leaned; or the sight of the petrified smile which contracted hisface,one would have said that nothing living was left about ClaudeFrollo except his eyes.The gypsy was dancing; she was twirling her tambourine on the tip of herfinger, and tossing it into the air as she danced Provençal sarabands;agile, light, joyous, and unconscious of the formidable gaze whichdescended perpendicularly upon her head.The crowd was swarming around her; from time to time, a man accoutred inred and yellow made them form into a circle, and then returned, seatedhimself on a chair a few paces from the dancer, and took the goat headon his knees. This man seemed to be the gypsy companion. Claude Frollocould not distinguish his features from his elevated post.From the moment when the archdeacon caught sight of this stranger, hisattention seemed divided between him and the dancer, and his face becamemore and more gloomy. All at once he rose upright, and a quiver ranthrough his whole body: Who is that man? he muttered between histeeth: I have always seen her alone before!Then he plunged down beneath the tortuous vault of the spiral staircase,and once more descended. As he passed the door of the bell chamber,which was ajar, he saw something which struck him; he beheld Quasimodo,who, leaning through an opening of one of those slate penthouses whichresemble enormous blinds, appeared also to be gazing at the Place. Hewas engaged in so profound a contemplation, that he did not notice thepassage of his adopted father. His savage eye had a singular expression;it was a charmed, tender look. This is strange! murmured Claude. Isit the gypsy at whom he is thus gazing? He continued his descent. Atthe end of a few minutes, the anxious archdeacon entered upon the Placefrom the door at the base of the tower.What has become of the gypsy girl? he said, mingling with the group ofspectators which the sound of the tambourine had collected.I know not, replied one of his neighbors, I think that she has goneto make some of her fandangoes in the house opposite, whither they havecalled her.In the place of the gypsy, on the carpet, whose arabesques had seemed tovanish but a moment previously by the capricious figures of her dance,the archdeacon no longer beheld any one but the red and yellow man,who, in order to earn a few testers in his turn, was walking round thecircle, with his elbows on his hips, his head thrown back, his face red,his neck outstretched, with a chair between his teeth. To the chair hehad fastened a cat, which a neighbor had lent, and which was spitting ingreat affright.NotreDame! exclaimed the archdeacon, at the moment when the juggler,perspiring heavily, passed in front of him with his pyramid of chair andhis cat, What is Master Pierre Gringoire doing here?The harsh voice of the archdeacon threw the poor fellow into such acommotion that he lost his equilibrium, together with his whole edifice,and the chair and the cat tumbled pellmell upon the heads of thespectators, in the midst of inextinguishable hootings.It is probable that Master Pierre Gringoire (for it was indeed he) wouldhave had a sorry account to settle with the neighbor who owned the cat,and all the bruised and scratched faces which surrounded him, if hehad not hastened to profit by the tumult to take refuge in the church,whither Claude Frollo had made him a sign to follow him.The cathedral was already dark and deserted; the sideaisles were fullof shadows, and the lamps of the chapels began to shine out like stars,so black had the vaulted ceiling become. Only the great rose window ofthe façade, whose thousand colors were steeped in a ray of horizontalsunlight, glittered in the gloom like a mass of diamonds, and threw itsdazzling reflection to the other end of the nave.When they had advanced a few paces, Dom Claude placed his back against apillar, and gazed intently at Gringoire. The gaze was not the one whichGringoire feared, ashamed as he was of having been caught by a grave andlearned person in the costume of a buffoon. There was nothing mocking orironical in the priest glance, it was serious, tranquil, piercing. Thearchdeacon was the first to break the silence.Come now, Master Pierre. You are to explain many things to me. Andfirst of all, how comes it that you have not been seen for two months,and that now one finds you in the public squares, in a fine equipment intruth! Motley red and yellow, like a Caudebec apple?Messire, said Gringoire, piteously, it is, in fact, an amazingaccoutrement. You see me no more comfortable in it than a cat coiffedwith a calabash. Tis very ill done, I am conscious, to expose messieursthe sergeants of the watch to the liability of cudgelling beneath thiscassock the humerus of a Pythagorean philosopher. But what would youhave, my reverend master? tis the fault of my ancient jerkin, whichabandoned me in cowardly wise, at the beginning of the winter, under thepretext that it was falling into tatters, and that it required repose inthe basket of a ragpicker. What is one to do? Civilization has not yetarrived at the point where one can go stark naked, as ancient Diogeneswished. Add that a very cold wind was blowing, and tis not in the monthof January that one can successfully attempt to make humanity takethis new step. This garment presented itself, I took it, and I left myancient black smock, which, for a hermetic like myself, was farfrom being hermetically closed. Behold me then, in the garments of astageplayer, like Saint Genest. What would you have? tis an eclipse.Apollo himself tended the flocks of Admetus.Tis a fine profession that you are engaged in! replied thearchdeacon.I agree, my master, that tis better to philosophize and poetize, toblow the flame in the furnace, or to receive it from carry cats on ashield. So, when you addressed me, I was as foolish as an ass before aturnspit. But what would you have, messire? One must eat every day, andthe finest Alexandrine verses are not worth a bit of Brie cheese. Now, Imade for Madame Marguerite of Flanders, that famous epithalamium, as youknow, and the city will not pay me, under the pretext that it was notexcellent; as though one could give a tragedy of Sophocles for fourcrowns! Hence, I was on the point of dying with hunger. Happily, I foundthat I was rather strong in the jaw; so I said to this jaw,performsome feats of strength and of equilibrium: nourish thyself. _Ale teipsam_. A pack of beggars who have become my good friends, have taughtme twenty sorts of herculean feats, and now I give to my teeth everyevening the bread which they have earned during the day by the sweat ofmy brow. After all, concede, I grant that it is a sad employment formy intellectual faculties, and that man is not made to pass his life inbeating the tambourine and biting chairs. But, reverend master, it isnot sufficient to pass one life, one must earn the means for life.Dom Claude listened in silence. All at once his deepset eye assumed sosagacious and penetrating an expression, that Gringoire felt himself, soto speak, searched to the bottom of the soul by that glance.Very good, Master Pierre; but how comes it that you are now in companywith that gypsy dancer?In faith! said Gringoire, tis because she is my wife and I am herhusband.The priest gloomy eyes flashed into flame.Have you done that, you wretch! he cried, seizing Gringoire arm withfury; have you been so abandoned by God as to raise your hand againstthat girl?On my chance of paradise, monseigneur, replied Gringoire, tremblingin every limb, I swear to you that I have never touched her, if that iswhat disturbs you.Then why do you talk of husband and wife? said the priest. Gringoiremade haste to relate to him as succinctly as possible, all that thereader already knows, his adventure in the Court of Miracles and thebrokencrock marriage. It appeared, moreover, that this marriage had ledto no results whatever, and that each evening the gypsy girl cheatedhim of his nuptial right as on the first day. Tis a mortification, he said in conclusion, but that is because I have had the misfortune towed a virgin.What do you mean? demanded the archdeacon, who had been graduallyappeased by this recital.Tis very difficult to explain, replied the poet. It is asuperstition. My wife is, according to what an old thief, who is calledamong us the Duke of Egypt, has told me, a foundling or a lost child,which is the same thing. She wears on her neck an amulet which, it isaffirmed, will cause her to meet her parents some day, but which willlose its virtue if the young girl loses hers. Hence it follows that bothof us remain very virtuous.So, resumed Claude, whose brow cleared more and more, you believe,Master Pierre, that this creature has not been approached by any man?What would you have a man do, Dom Claude, as against a superstition?She has got that in her head. I assuredly esteem as a rarity thisnunlike prudery which is preserved untamed amid those Bohemian girlswho are so easily brought into subjection. But she has three things toprotect her: the Duke of Egypt, who has taken her under his safeguard,reckoning, perchance, on selling her to some gay abbé; all his tribe,who hold her in singular veneration, like a NotreDame; and a certaintiny poignard, which the buxom dame always wears about her, in somenook, in spite of the ordinances of the provost, and which one causes tofly out into her hands by squeezing her waist. Tis a proud wasp, I cantell you!The archdeacon pressed Gringoire with questions.La Esmeralda, in the judgment of Gringoire, was an inoffensive andcharming creature, pretty, with the exception of a pout which waspeculiar to her; a naïve and passionate damsel, ignorant of everythingand enthusiastic about everything; not yet aware of the differencebetween a man and a woman, even in her dreams; made like that; wildespecially over dancing, noise, the open air; a sort of woman bee, withinvisible wings on her feet, and living in a whirlwind. She owed thisnature to the wandering life which she had always led. Gringoire hadsucceeded in learning that, while a mere child, she had traversed Spainand Catalonia, even to Sicily; he believed that she had even been takenby the caravan of Zingari, of which she formed a part, to the kingdomof Algiers, a country situated in Achaia, which country adjoins, on oneside Albania and Greece; on the other, the Sicilian Sea, which is theroad to Constantinople. The Bohemians, said Gringoire, were vassals ofthe King of Algiers, in his quality of chief of the White Moors. Onething is certain, that la Esmeralda had come to France while still veryyoung, by way of Hungary. From all these countries the young girl hadbrought back fragments of queer jargons, songs, and strange ideas, whichmade her language as motley as her costume, half Parisian, half African.However, the people of the quarters which she frequented loved her forher gayety, her daintiness, her lively manners, her dances, and hersongs. She believed herself to be hated, in all the city, by but twopersons, of whom she often spoke in terror: the sacked nun of theTourRoland, a villanous recluse who cherished some secret grudgeagainst these gypsies, and who cursed the poor dancer every time thatthe latter passed before her window; and a priest, who never met herwithout casting at her looks and words which frightened her.The mention of this last circumstance disturbed the archdeacon greatly,though Gringoire paid no attention to his perturbation; to such anextent had two months sufficed to cause the heedless poet to forget thesingular details of the evening on which he had met the gypsy, andthe presence of the archdeacon in it all. Otherwise, the little dancerfeared nothing; she did not tell fortunes, which protected her againstthose trials for magic which were so frequently instituted against gypsywomen. And then, Gringoire held the position of her brother, if not ofher husband. After all, the philosopher endured this sort of platonicmarriage very patiently. It meant a shelter and bread at least. Everymorning, he set out from the lair of the thieves, generally with thegypsy; he helped her make her collections of targes and little blanksin the squares; each evening he returned to the same roof with her,allowed her to bolt herself into her little chamber, and slept the sleepof the just. A very sweet existence, taking it all in all, he said,and well adapted to revery. And then, on his soul and conscience, thephilosopher was not very sure that he was madly in love with the gypsy.He loved her goat almost as dearly. It was a charming animal, gentle,intelligent, clever; a learned goat. Nothing was more common in theMiddle Ages than these learned animals, which amazed people greatly, andoften led their instructors to the stake. But the witchcraft of the goatwith the golden hoofs was a very innocent species of magic. Gringoireexplained them to the archdeacon, whom these details seemed to interestdeeply. In the majority of cases, it was sufficient to present thetambourine to the goat in such or such a manner, in order to obtain fromhim the trick desired. He had been trained to this by the gypsy, whopossessed, in these delicate arts, so rare a talent that two monthshad sufficed to teach the goat to write, with movable letters, the wordPhoebus.    An ancient Burgundian coin.   An ancient French coin.Phoebus!’ said the priest; why Phoebus’?I know not, replied Gringoire. Perhaps it is a word which shebelieves to be endowed with some magic and secret virtue. She oftenrepeats it in a low tone when she thinks that she is alone.Are you sure, persisted Claude, with his penetrating glance, that itis only a word and not a name?The name of whom? said the poet.How should I know? said the priest.This is what I imagine, messire. These Bohemians are something likeGuebrs, and adore the sun. Hence, Phoebus.That does not seem so clear to me as to you, Master Pierre.After all, that does not concern me. Let her mumble her Phoebus at herpleasure. One thing is certain, that Djali loves me almost as much as hedoes her.Who is Djali?The goat.The archdeacon dropped his chin into his hand, and appeared to reflectfor a moment. All at once he turned abruptly to Gringoire once more.And do you swear to me that you have not touched her?Whom? said Gringoire; the goat?No, that woman.My wife? I swear to you that I have not.You are often alone with her?A good hour every evening.Porn Claude frowned.Oh! oh! _Solus cum sola non cogitabuntur orare Pater Noster_.Upon my soul, I could say the _Pater_, and the _Ave Maria_, andthe _Credo in Deum patrem omnipotentem_ without her paying any moreattention to me than a chicken to a church.Swear to me, by the body of your mother, repeated the archdeaconviolently, that you have not touched that creature with even the tip ofyour finger.I will also swear it by the head of my father, for the two thingshave more affinity between them. But, my reverend master, permit me aquestion in my turn.Speak, sir.What concern is it of yours?The archdeacon pale face became as crimson as the cheek of a younggirl. He remained for a moment without answering; then, with visibleembarrassment,Listen, Master Pierre Gringoire. You are not yet damned, so far asI know. I take an interest in you, and wish you well. Now the leastcontact with that Egyptian of the demon would make you the vassal ofSatan. You know that tis always the body which ruins the soul. Woe toyou if you approach that woman! That is all.I tried once, said Gringoire, scratching his ear; it was the firstday: but I got stung.You were so audacious, Master Pierre? and the priest brow cloudedover again.On another occasion, continued the poet, with a smile, I peepedthrough the keyhole, before going to bed, and I beheld the mostdelicious dame in her shift that ever made a bed creak under her barefoot.Go to the devil! cried the priest, with a terrible look; and, givingthe amazed Gringoire a push on the shoulders, he plunged, with longstrides, under the gloomiest arcades of the cathedral.CHAPTER III. THE BELLS.After the morning in the pillory, the neighbors of NotreDame thoughtthey noticed that Quasimodo ardor for ringing had grown cool.Formerly, there had been peals for every occasion, long morningserenades, which lasted from prime to compline; peals from the belfryfor a high mass, rich scales drawn over the smaller bells for a wedding,for a christening, and mingling in the air like a rich embroidery of allsorts of charming sounds. The old church, all vibrating and sonorous,was in a perpetual joy of bells. One was constantly conscious of thepresence of a spirit of noise and caprice, who sang through all thosemouths of brass. Now that spirit seemed to have departed; the cathedralseemed gloomy, and gladly remained silent; festivals and funerals hadthe simple peal, dry and bare, demanded by the ritual, nothing more. Ofthe double noise which constitutes a church, the organ within, the bellwithout, the organ alone remained. One would have said that there wasno longer a musician in the belfry. Quasimodo was always there,nevertheless; what, then, had happened to him? Was it that the shame anddespair of the pillory still lingered in the bottom of his heart, thatthe lashes of his tormentor whip reverberated unendingly in his soul,and that the sadness of such treatment had wholly extinguished in himeven his passion for the bells? or was it that Marie had a rival in theheart of the bellringer of NotreDame, and that the great bell and herfourteen sisters were neglected for something more amiable and morebeautiful?It chanced that, in the year of grace 1482, Annunciation Day fell onTuesday, the twentyfifth of March. That day the air was so pure andlight that Quasimodo felt some returning affection for his bells. Hetherefore ascended the northern tower while the beadle below was openingwide the doors of the church, which were then enormous panels of stoutwood, covered with leather, bordered with nails of gilded iron, andframed in carvings very artistically elaborated.On arriving in the lofty bell chamber, Quasimodo gazed for some timeat the six bells and shook his head sadly, as though groaning over someforeign element which had interposed itself in his heart between themand him. But when he had set them to swinging, when he felt that clusterof bells moving under his hand, when he saw, for he did not hear it, thepalpitating octave ascend and descend that sonorous scale, like a birdhopping from branch to branch; when the demon Music, that demon whoshakes a sparkling bundle of strette, trills and arpeggios, had takenpossession of the poor deaf man, he became happy once more, he forgoteverything, and his heart expanding, made his face beam.He went and came, he beat his hands together, he ran from rope to rope,he animated the six singers with voice and gesture, like the leader ofan orchestra who is urging on intelligent musicians.Go on, said he, go on, go on, Gabrielle, pour out all thy noiseinto the Place, tis a festival today. No laziness, Thibauld; thou artrelaxing; go on, go on, then, art thou rusted, thou sluggard? That iswell! quick! quick! let not thy clapper be seen! Make them all deaf likeme. That it, Thibauld, bravely done! Guillaume! Guillaume! thou artthe largest, and Pasquier is the smallest, and Pasquier does best. Letus wager that those who hear him will understand him better than theyunderstand thee. Good! good! my Gabrielle, stoutly, more stoutly! Eli!what are you doing up aloft there, you two Moineaux (sparrows)? I do notsee you making the least little shred of noise. What is the meaning ofthose beaks of copper which seem to be gaping when they should sing?Come, work now, tis the Feast of the Annunciation. The sun is fine, thechime must be fine also. Poor Guillaume! thou art all out of breath, mybig fellow!He was wholly absorbed in spurring on his bells, all six of which viedwith each other in leaping and shaking their shining haunches, likea noisy team of Spanish mules, pricked on here and there by theapostrophes of the muleteer.All at once, on letting his glance fall between the large slate scaleswhich cover the perpendicular wall of the bell tower at a certainheight, he beheld on the square a young girl, fantastically dressed,stop, spread out on the ground a carpet, on which a small goat tookup its post, and a group of spectators collect around her. This sightsuddenly changed the course of his ideas, and congealed his enthusiasmas a breath of air congeals melted rosin. He halted, turned his back tothe bells, and crouched down behind the projecting roof of slate, fixingupon the dancer that dreamy, sweet, and tender look which had alreadyastonished the archdeacon on one occasion. Meanwhile, the forgottenbells died away abruptly and all together, to the great disappointmentof the lovers of bell ringing, who were listening in good faith to thepeal from above the Pont du Change, and who went away dumbfounded, likea dog who has been offered a bone and given a stone.CHAPTER IV. _ANANKE_.It chanced that upon a fine morning in this same month of March, I thinkit was on Saturday the 29th, Saint Eustache day, our young friend thestudent, Jehan Frollo du Moulin, perceived, as he was dressing himself,that his breeches, which contained his purse, gave out no metallic ring.Poor purse, he said, drawing it from his fob, what! not the smallestparisis! how cruelly the dice, beerpots, and Venus have depleted thee!How empty, wrinkled, limp, thou art! Thou resemblest the throat of afury! I ask you, Messer Cicero, and Messer Seneca, copies of whom, alldogeared, I behold scattered on the floor, what profits it me toknow, better than any governor of the mint, or any Jew on the Pont auxChangeurs, that a golden crown stamped with a crown is worth thirtyfiveunzains of twentyfive sous, and eight deniers parisis apiece, andthat a crown stamped with a crescent is worth thirtysix unzains oftwentysix sous, six deniers tournois apiece, if I have not a singlewretched black liard to risk on the doublesix! Oh! Consul Cicero! thisis no calamity from which one extricates one self with periphrases,_quemadmodum_, and _verum enim vero_!He dressed himself sadly. An idea had occurred to him as he laced hisboots, but he rejected it at first; nevertheless, it returned, and heput on his waistcoat wrong side out, an evident sign of violent internalcombat. At last he dashed his cap roughly on the floor, and exclaimed:So much the worse! Let come of it what may. I am going to my brother! Ishall catch a sermon, but I shall catch a crown.Then he hastily donned his long jacket with furred halfsleeves, pickedup his cap, and went out like a man driven to desperation.He descended the Rue de la Harpe toward the City. As he passed theRue de la Huchette, the odor of those admirable spits, which wereincessantly turning, tickled his olfactory apparatus, and he bestoweda loving glance toward the Cyclopean roast, which one day drew from theFranciscan friar, Calatagirone, this pathetic exclamation: _Veramente,queste rotisserie sono cosa stupenda_! But Jehan had not thewherewithal to buy a breakfast, and he plunged, with a profound sigh,under the gateway of the PetitChâtelet, that enormous double trefoil ofmassive towers which guarded the entrance to the City.    Truly, these roastings are a stupendous thing!He did not even take the trouble to cast a stone in passing, as was theusage, at the miserable statue of that Périnet Leclerc who had deliveredup the Paris of Charles VI. to the English, a crime which his effigy,its face battered with stones and soiled with mud, expiated for threecenturies at the corner of the Rue de la Harpe and the Rue de Buci, asin an eternal pillory.The PetitPont traversed, the Rue NeuveSainteGeneviève crossed, Jehande Molendino found himself in front of NotreDame. Then indecisionseized upon him once more, and he paced for several minutes round thestatue of M. Legris, repeating to himself with anguish: The sermon issure, the crown is doubtful.He stopped a beadle who emerged from the cloister,Where is monsieurthe archdeacon of Josas?I believe that he is in his secret cell in the tower, said the beadle;I should advise you not to disturb him there, unless you come from someone like the pope or monsieur the king.Jehan clapped his hands._Bécliable_! here a magnificent chance to see the famous sorcerycell!This reflection having brought him to a decision, he plunged resolutelyinto the small black doorway, and began the ascent of the spiral ofSaintGilles, which leads to the upper stories of the tower. I amgoing to see, he said to himself on the way. By the ravens of the HolyVirgin! it must needs be a curious thing, that cell which my reverendbrother hides so secretly! Tis said that he lights up the kitchens ofhell there, and that he cooks the philosopher stone there over a hotfire. _Bédieu_! I care no more for the philosopher stone than for apebble, and I would rather find over his furnace an omelette of Eastereggs and bacon, than the biggest philosopher stone in the world.’On arriving at the gallery of slender columns, he took breath for amoment, and swore against the interminable staircase by I know not howmany million cartloads of devils; then he resumed his ascent throughthe narrow door of the north tower, now closed to the public.Several moments after passing the bell chamber, he came upon a littlelandingplace, built in a lateral niche, and under the vault of a low,pointed door, whose enormous lock and strong iron bars he was enabledto see through a loophole pierced in the opposite circular wall of thestaircase. Persons desirous of visiting this door at the present daywill recognize it by this inscription engraved in white letters on theblack wall: J’ADORE CORALIE, 1823. SIGNE UGENE. Signé stands in thetext.Ugh! said the scholar; tis here, no doubt.The key was in the lock, the door was very close to him; he gave it agentle push and thrust his head through the opening.The reader cannot have failed to turn over the admirable works ofRembrandt, that Shakespeare of painting. Amid so many marvellousengravings, there is one etching in particular, which is supposedto represent Doctor Faust, and which it is impossible to contemplatewithout being dazzled. It represents a gloomy cell; in the centre is atable loaded with hideous objects; skulls, spheres, alembics, compasses,hieroglyphic parchments. The doctor is before this table clad in hislarge coat and covered to the very eyebrows with his furred cap. He isvisible only to his waist. He has half risen from his immense armchair,his clenched fists rest on the table, and he is gazing with curiosityand terror at a large luminous circle, formed of magic letters, whichgleams from the wall beyond, like the solar spectrum in a dark chamber.This cabalistic sun seems to tremble before the eye, and fills the wancell with its mysterious radiance. It is horrible and it is beautiful.Something very similar to Faust cell presented itself to Jehan view,when he ventured his head through the halfopen door. It also was agloomy and sparsely lighted retreat. There also stood a large armchairand a large table, compasses, alembics, skeletons of animals suspendedfrom the ceiling, a globe rolling on the floor, hippocephali mingledpromiscuously with drinking cups, in which quivered leaves of gold,skulls placed upon vellum checkered with figures and characters, hugemanuscripts piled up wide open, without mercy on the cracking corners ofthe parchment; in short, all the rubbish of science, and everywhereon this confusion dust and spiders’ webs; but there was no circle ofluminous letters, no doctor in an ecstasy contemplating the flamingvision, as the eagle gazes upon the sun.Nevertheless, the cell was not deserted. A man was seated in thearmchair, and bending over the table. Jehan, to whom his back wasturned, could see only his shoulders and the back of his skull; buthe had no difficulty in recognizing that bald head, which nature hadprovided with an eternal tonsure, as though desirous of marking, by thisexternal symbol, the archdeacon irresistible clerical vocation.Jehan accordingly recognized his brother; but the door had beenopened so softly, that nothing warned Dom Claude of his presence. Theinquisitive scholar took advantage of this circumstance to examine thecell for a few moments at his leisure. A large furnace, which he hadnot at first observed, stood to the left of the armchair, beneath thewindow. The ray of light which penetrated through this aperture madeits way through a spider circular web, which tastefully inscribed itsdelicate rose in the arch of the window, and in the centre of which theinsect architect hung motionless, like the hub of this wheel of lace.Upon the furnace were accumulated in disorder, all sorts of vases,earthenware bottles, glass retorts, and mattresses of charcoal. Jehanobserved, with a sigh, that there was no fryingpan. How cold thekitchen utensils are! he said to himself.In fact, there was no fire in the furnace, and it seemed as though nonehad been lighted for a long time. A glass mask, which Jehan noticedamong the utensils of alchemy, and which served no doubt, to protect thearchdeacon face when he was working over some substance to be dreaded,lay in one corner covered with dust and apparently forgotten. Beside itlay a pair of bellows no less dusty, the upper side of which bore thisinscription incrusted in copper letters: SPIRA SPERA.Other inscriptions were written, in accordance with the fashion of thehermetics, in great numbers on the walls; some traced with ink, othersengraved with a metal point. There were, moreover, Gothic letters,Hebrew letters, Greek letters, and Roman letters, pellmell; theinscriptions overflowed at haphazard, on top of each other, the morerecent effacing the more ancient, and all entangled with each other,like the branches in a thicket, like pikes in an affray. It was, infact, a strangely confused mingling of all human philosophies, allreveries, all human wisdom. Here and there one shone out from among therest like a banner among lance heads. Generally, it was a brief Greekor Roman device, such as the Middle Ages knew so well how toformulate._Unde? Inde?Homo homini monstrurnAst’ra, castra, nomen,numen.Meya Bibklov, ueya xaxov.Sapere aude. Fiat ubi vult_etc.;sometimes a word devoid of all apparent sense, _Avayxoqpayia_, whichpossibly contained a bitter allusion to the regime of the cloister;sometimes a simple maxim of clerical discipline formulated in a regularhexameter _Coelestem dominum terrestrem dicite dominum_. There wasalso Hebrew jargon, of which Jehan, who as yet knew but little Greek,understood nothing; and all were traversed in every direction by stars,by figures of men or animals, and by intersecting triangles; and thiscontributed not a little to make the scrawled wall of the cell resemblea sheet of paper over which a monkey had drawn back and forth a penfilled with ink.The whole chamber, moreover, presented a general aspect of abandonmentand dilapidation; and the bad state of the utensils induced thesupposition that their owner had long been distracted from his laborsby other preoccupations. Meanwhile, this master, bent over a vastmanuscript, ornamented with fantastical illustrations, appeared to betormented by an idea which incessantly mingled with his meditations.That at least was Jehan idea, when he heard him exclaim, with thethoughtful breaks of a dreamer thinking aloud,Yes, Manou said it, and Zoroaster taught it! the sun is born from fire,the moon from the sun; fire is the soul of the universe; its elementaryatoms pour forth and flow incessantly upon the world through infinitechannels! At the point where these currents intersect each other in theheavens, they produce light; at their points of intersection on earth,they produce gold. Light, gold; the same thing! From fire to theconcrete state. The difference between the visible and the palpable,between the fluid and the solid in the same substance, between water andice, nothing more. These are no dreams; it is the general law of nature.But what is one to do in order to extract from science the secret ofthis general law? What! this light which inundates my hand is gold!These same atoms dilated in accordance with a certain law need only becondensed in accordance with another law. How is it to be done?Some have fancied by burying a ray of sunlight, Averroës,yes, tisAverroës,Averroës buried one under the first pillar on the left of thesanctuary of the Koran, in the great Mahometan mosque of Cordova; butthe vault cannot be opened for the purpose of ascertaining whether theoperation has succeeded, until after the lapse of eight thousand years.The devil! said Jehan, to himself, tis a long while to wait for acrown!Others have thought, continued the dreamy archdeacon, that itwould be better worth while to operate upon a ray of Sirius. But tisexceeding hard to obtain this ray pure, because of the simultaneouspresence of other stars whose rays mingle with it. Flamel esteemedit more simple to operate upon terrestrial fire. Flamel! therepredestination in the name! _Flamma_! yes, fire. All lies there. Thediamond is contained in the carbon, gold is in the fire. But how toextract it? Magistri affirms that there are certain feminine names,which possess a charm so sweet and mysterious, that it suffices topronounce them during the operation. Let us read what Manon says on thematter: Where women are honored, the divinities are rejoiced; wherethey are despised, it is useless to pray to God. The mouth of a womanis constantly pure; it is a running water, it is a ray of sunlight. Thename of a woman should be agreeable, sweet, fanciful; it should end inlong vowels, and resemble words of benediction.’ Yes, the sage is right;in truth, Maria, Sophia, la EsmeralDamnation! always that thought!And he closed the book violently.He passed his hand over his brow, as though to brush away the idea whichassailed him; then he took from the table a nail and a small hammer,whose handle was curiously painted with cabalistic letters.For some time, he said with a bitter smile, I have failed in all myexperiments! one fixed idea possesses me, and sears my brain like fire.I have not even been able to discover the secret of Cassiodorus,whose lamp burned without wick and without oil. A simple matter,neverthelessThe deuce! muttered Jehan in his beard.Hence, continued the priest, one wretched thought is sufficient torender a man weak and beside himself! Oh! how Claude Pernelle wouldlaugh at me. She who could not turn Nicholas Flamel aside, for onemoment, from his pursuit of the great work! What! I hold in my hand themagic hammer of Zéchiélé! at every blow dealt by the formidable rabbi,from the depths of his cell, upon this nail, that one of his enemieswhom he had condemned, were he a thousand leagues away, was buried acubit deep in the earth which swallowed him. The King of France himself,in consequence of once having inconsiderately knocked at the door of thethermaturgist, sank to the knees through the pavement of his own Paris.This took place three centuries ago. Well! I possess the hammer and thenail, and in my hands they are utensils no more formidable than a clubin the hands of a maker of edge tools. And yet all that is requiredis to find the magic word which Zéchiélé pronounced when he struck hisnail.What nonsense! thought Jehan.Let us see, let us try! resumed the archdeacon briskly. Were I tosucceed, I should behold the blue spark flash from the head of the nail.EmenHétan! EmenHétan! That not it. Sigéani! Sigéani! May this nailopen the tomb to any one who bears the name of Phoebus! A curse upon it!Always and eternally the same idea!And he flung away the hammer in a rage. Then he sank down so deeply onthe armchair and the table, that Jehan lost him from view behind thegreat pile of manuscripts. For the space of several minutes, all that hesaw was his fist convulsively clenched on a book. Suddenly, Dom Claudesprang up, seized a compass and engraved in silence upon the wall incapital letters, this Greek word     _ANANKE_.My brother is mad, said Jehan to himself; it would have been far moresimple to write _Fatum_, every one is not obliged to know Greek.The archdeacon returned and seated himself in his armchair, and placedhis head on both his hands, as a sick man does, whose head is heavy andburning.The student watched his brother with surprise. He did not know, he whowore his heart on his sleeve, he who observed only the good old lawof Nature in the world, he who allowed his passions to follow theirinclinations, and in whom the lake of great emotions was always dry, sofreely did he let it off each day by fresh drains,he did not know withwhat fury the sea of human passions ferments and boils when all egressis denied to it, how it accumulates, how it swells, how it overflows,how it hollows out the heart; how it breaks in inward sobs, and dullconvulsions, until it has rent its dikes and burst its bed. The austereand glacial envelope of Claude Frollo, that cold surface of steep andinaccessible virtue, had always deceived Jehan. The merry scholar hadnever dreamed that there was boiling lava, furious and profound, beneaththe snowy brow of AEtna.We do not know whether he suddenly became conscious of these things;but, giddy as he was, he understood that he had seen what he ought notto have seen, that he had just surprised the soul of his elder brotherin one of its most secret altitudes, and that Claude must not be allowedto know it. Seeing that the archdeacon had fallen back into his formerimmobility, he withdrew his head very softly, and made some noise withhis feet outside the door, like a person who has just arrived and isgiving warning of his approach.Enter! cried the archdeacon, from the interior of his cell; Iwas expecting you. I left the door unlocked expressly; enter MasterJacques!The scholar entered boldly. The archdeacon, who was very muchembarrassed by such a visit in such a place, trembled in his armchair.What! tis you, Jehan?Tis a J, all the same, said the scholar, with his ruddy, merry, andaudacious face.Dom Claude visage had resumed its severe expression.What are you come for?Brother, replied the scholar, making an effort to assume a decent,pitiful, and modest mien, and twirling his cap in his hands with aninnocent air; I am come to ask of youWhat?A little lecture on morality, of which I stand greatly in need, Jehandid not dare to add aloud,and a little money of which I am in stillgreater need. This last member of his phrase remained unuttered.Monsieur, said the archdeacon, in a cold tone, I am greatlydispleased with you.Alas! sighed the scholar.Dom Claude made his armchair describe a quarter circle, and gazedintently at Jehan.I am very glad to see you.This was a formidable exordium. Jehan braced himself for a roughencounter.Jehan, complaints are brought me about you every day. What affray wasthat in which you bruised with a cudgel a little vicomte, Albert deRamonchamp?Oh! said Jehan, a vast thing that! A malicious page amused himself bysplashing the scholars, by making his horse gallop through the mire!Who, pursued the archdeacon, is that Mahiet Fargel, whose gown youhave torn? _Tunicam dechiraverunt_, saith the complaint.Ah bah! a wretched cap of a Montaigu! Isn’t that it?The complaint says _tunicam_ and not _cappettam_. Do you know Latin?Jehan did not reply.Yes, pursued the priest shaking his head, that is the state oflearning and letters at the present day. The Latin tongue is hardlyunderstood, Syriac is unknown, Greek so odious that tis accounted noignorance in the most learned to skip a Greek word without reading it,and to say, _Groecum est non legitur_.’The scholar raised his eyes boldly. Monsieur my brother, doth it pleaseyou that I shall explain in good French vernacular that Greek word whichis written yonder on the wall?What word?_ANANKE_.A slight flush spread over the cheeks of the priest with their highbones, like the puff of smoke which announces on the outside the secretcommotions of a volcano. The student hardly noticed it.Well, Jehan, stammered the elder brother with an effort, What is themeaning of yonder word?FATE.Dom Claude turned pale again, and the scholar pursued carelessly.And that word below it, graved by the same hand, _Ayáyvela_, signifiesimpurity.’ You see that people do know their Greek.And the archdeacon remained silent. This Greek lesson had rendered himthoughtful.Master Jehan, who possessed all the artful ways of a spoiled child,judged that the moment was a favorable one in which to risk his request.Accordingly, he assumed an extremely soft tone and began,My good brother, do you hate me to such a degree as to look savagelyupon me because of a few mischievous cuffs and blows distributed in afair war to a pack of lads and brats, _quibusdam marmosetis_? You see,good Brother Claude, that people know their Latin.But all this caressing hypocrisy did not have its usual effect on thesevere elder brother. Cerberus did not bite at the honey cake. Thearchdeacon brow did not lose a single wrinkle.What are you driving at? he said dryly.Well, in point of fact, this! replied Jehan bravely, I stand in needof money.At this audacious declaration, the archdeacon visage assumed athoroughly pedagogical and paternal expression.You know, Monsieur Jehan, that our fief of Tirechappe, putting thedirect taxes and the rents of the nine and twenty houses in a block,yields only nine and thirty livres, eleven sous, six deniers, Parisian.It is one half more than in the time of the brothers Paclet, but it isnot much.I need money, said Jehan stoically.You know that the official has decided that our twentyone housesshould he moved full into the fief of the Bishopric, and that we couldredeem this homage only by paying the reverend bishop two marks ofsilver gilt of the price of six livres parisis. Now, these two marks Ihave not yet been able to get together. You know it.I know that I stand in need of money, repeated Jehan for the thirdtime.And what are you going to do with it?This question caused a flash of hope to gleam before Jehan eyes. Heresumed his dainty, caressing air.Stay, dear Brother Claude, I should not come to you, with any evilmotive. There is no intention of cutting a dash in the taverns with yourunzains, and of strutting about the streets of Paris in a caparison ofgold brocade, with a lackey, _cum meo laquasio_. No, brother, tis for agood work.What good work? demanded Claude, somewhat surprised.Two of my friends wish to purchase an outfit for the infant of a poorHaudriette widow. It is a charity. It will cost three forms, and Ishould like to contribute to it.What are names of your two friends?Pierre l’Assommeur and Baptiste CroqueOison.    Peter the Slaughterer; and Baptist CrackGosling.Hum, said the archdeacon; those are names as fit for a good work as acatapult for the chief altar.It is certain that Jehan had made a very bad choice of names for his twofriends. He realized it too late.And then, pursued the sagacious Claude, what sort of an infantoutfit is it that is to cost three forms, and that for the child of aHaudriette? Since when have the Haudriette widows taken to having babesin swaddlingclothes?Jehan broke the ice once more.Eh, well! yes! I need money in order to go and see Isabeau la Thierryetonight; in the Vald’ Amour!Impure wretch! exclaimed the priest._Avayveia_! said Jehan.This quotation, which the scholar borrowed with malice, perchance, fromthe wall of the cell, produced a singular effect on the archdeacon. Hebit his lips and his wrath was drowned in a crimson flush.Begone, he said to Jehan. I am expecting some one.The scholar made one more effort.Brother Claude, give me at least one little parisis to buy something toeat.How far have you gone in the Decretals of Gratian? demanded DomClaude.I have lost my copy books.Where are you in your Latin humanities?My copy of Horace has been stolen.Where are you in Aristotle?I’ faith! brother what father of the church is it, who says that theerrors of heretics have always had for their lurking place the thicketsof Aristotle metaphysics? A plague on Aristotle! I care not to tear myreligion on his metaphysics.Young man, resumed the archdeacon, at the king last entry, therewas a young gentleman, named Philippe de Comines, who wore embroideredon the housings of his horse this device, upon which I counsel you tomeditate: _Qui non laborat, non manducet_.The scholar remained silent for a moment, with his finger in his ear,his eyes on the ground, and a discomfited mien.All at once he turned round to Claude with the agile quickness of awagtail.So, my good brother, you refuse me a sou parisis, wherewith to buy acrust at a baker shop?_Qui non laborat, non manducet_.At this response of the inflexible archdeacon, Jehan hid his head inhis hands, like a woman sobbing, and exclaimed with an expression ofdespair: _Orororororoi_.What is the meaning of this, sir? demanded Claude, surprised at thisfreak.What indeed! said the scholar; and he lifted to Claude his impudenteyes into which he had just thrust his fists in order to communicate tothem the redness of tears; tis Greek! tis an anapaest of AEschyluswhich expresses grief perfectly.And here he burst into a laugh so droll and violent that it made thearchdeacon smile. It was Claude fault, in fact: why had he so spoiledthat child?Oh! good Brother Claude, resumed Jehan, emboldened by this smile,look at my worn out boots. Is there a cothurnus in the world moretragic than these boots, whose soles are hanging out their tongues?The archdeacon promptly returned to his original severity.I will send you some new boots, but no money.Only a poor little parisis, brother, continued the suppliant Jehan. Iwill learn Gratian by heart, I will believe firmly in God, I will bea regular Pythagoras of science and virtue. But one little parisis, inmercy! Would you have famine bite me with its jaws which are gaping infront of me, blacker, deeper, and more noisome than a Tartarus or thenose of a monk?Dom Claude shook his wrinkled head: _Qui non laborat_Jehan did not allow him to finish.Well, he exclaimed, to the devil then! Long live joy! I will live inthe tavern, I will fight, I will break pots and I will go and see thewenches. And thereupon, he hurled his cap at the wall, and snapped hisfingers like castanets.The archdeacon surveyed him with a gloomy air.Jehan, you have no soul.In that case, according to Epicurius, I lack a something made ofanother something which has no name.Jehan, you must think seriously of amending your ways.Oh, come now, cried the student, gazing in turn at his brother and thealembics on the furnace, everything is preposterous here, both ideasand bottles!Jehan, you are on a very slippery downward road. Do you know whitheryou are going?To the wineshop, said Jehan.The wineshop leads to the pillory.Tis as good a lantern as any other, and perchance with that one,Diogenes would have found his man.The pillory leads to the gallows.The gallows is a balance which has a man at one end and the whole earthat the other. Tis fine to be the man.The gallows leads to hell.Tis a big fire..Jehan, Jehan, the end will be bad.The beginning will have been good.At that moment, the sound of a footstep was heard on the staircase.Silence! said the archdeacon, laying his finger on his mouth, here isMaster Jacques. Listen, Jehan, he added, in a low voice; have a carenever to speak of what you shall have seen or heard here. Hide yourselfquickly under the furnace, and do not breathe.The scholar concealed himself; just then a happy idea occurred to him.By the way, Brother Claude, a form for not breathing.Silence! I promise.You must give it to me.Take it, then! said the archdeacon angrily, flinging his purse at him.Jehan darted under the furnace again, and the door opened.CHAPTER V. THE TWO MEN CLOTHED IN BLACK.The personage who entered wore a black gown and a gloomy mien. The firstpoint which struck the eye of our Jehan (who, as the reader will readilysurmise, had ensconced himself in his nook in such a manner as to enablehim to see and hear everything at his good pleasure) was the perfectsadness of the garments and the visage of this newcorner. There was,nevertheless, some sweetness diffused over that face, but it was thesweetness of a cat or a judge, an affected, treacherous sweetness. Hewas very gray and wrinkled, and not far from his sixtieth year, hiseyes blinked, his eyebrows were white, his lip pendulous, and his handslarge. When Jehan saw that it was only this, that is to say, no doubta physician or a magistrate, and that this man had a nose very far fromhis mouth, a sign of stupidity, he nestled down in his hole, in despairat being obliged to pass an indefinite time in such an uncomfortableattitude, and in such bad company.The archdeacon, in the meantime, had not even risen to receive thispersonage. He had made the latter a sign to seat himself on a stool nearthe door, and, after several moments of a silence which appeared to bea continuation of a preceding meditation, he said to him in a ratherpatronizing way, Good day, Master Jacques.Greeting, master, replied the man in black.There was in the two ways in which Master Jacques was pronouncedon the one hand, and the master by preeminence on the other, thedifference between monseigneur and monsieur, between _domine_ and_domne_. It was evidently the meeting of a teacher and a disciple.Well! resumed the archdeacon, after a fresh silence which MasterJacques took good care not to disturb, how are you succeeding?Alas! master, said the other, with a sad smile, I am still seekingthe stone. Plenty of ashes. But not a spark of gold.Dom Claude made a gesture of impatience. I am not talking to you ofthat, Master Jacques Charmolue, but of the trial of your magician. Is itnot Marc Cenaine that you call him? the butler of the Court of Accounts?Does he confess his witchcraft? Have you been successful with thetorture?Alas! no, replied Master Jacques, still with his sad smile; we havenot that consolation. That man is a stone. We might have him boiled inthe Marché aux Pourceaux, before he would say anything. Nevertheless, weare sparing nothing for the sake of getting at the truth; he is alreadythoroughly dislocated, we are applying all the herbs of Saint Johnday; as saith the old comedian Plautus,    _Advorsum stimulos, laminas, crucesque, compedesque,    Nerros, catenas, carceres, numellas, pedicas, boias_.’Nothing answers; that man is terrible. I am at my wit end over him.You have found nothing new in his house?I’ faith, yes, said Master Jacques, fumbling in his pouch; thisparchment. There are words in it which we cannot comprehend. Thecriminal advocate, Monsieur Philippe Lheulier, nevertheless, knows alittle Hebrew, which he learned in that matter of the Jews of the RueKantersten, at Brussels.So saying, Master Jacques unrolled a parchment. Give it here, said thearchdeacon. And casting his eyes upon this writing: Pure magic, MasterJacques! he exclaimed. EmenHétan!’ Tis the cry of the vampireswhen they arrive at the witches’ sabbath. _Per ipsum, et cum ipso, et inipso_! Tis the command which chains the devil in hell. _Hax, pax, max_!that refers to medicine. A formula against the bite of mad dogs. MasterJacques! you are procurator to the king in the Ecclesiastical Courts:this parchment is abominable.We will put the man to the torture once more. Here again, added MasterJacques, fumbling afresh in his pouch, is something that we have foundat Marc Cenaine house.It was a vessel belonging to the same family as those which covered DomClaude furnace.Ah! said the archdeacon, a crucible for alchemy.I will confess to you, continued Master Jacques, with his timidand awkward smile, that I have tried it over the furnace, but I havesucceeded no better than with my own.The archdeacon began an examination of the vessel. What has he engravedon his crucible? _Och! och_! the word which expels fleas! That MarcCenaine is an ignoramus! I verily believe that you will never make goldwith this! Tis good to set in your bedroom in summer and that is all!Since we are talking about errors, said the king procurator, Ihave just been studying the figures on the portal below before ascendinghither; is your reverence quite sure that the opening of the work ofphysics is there portrayed on the side towards the HôtelDieu, and thatamong the seven nude figures which stand at the feet of NotreDame, thatwhich has wings on his heels is Mercurius?Yes, replied the priest; tis Augustin Nypho who writes it, thatItalian doctor who had a bearded demon who acquainted him with allthings. However, we will descend, and I will explain it to you with thetext before us.Thanks, master, said Charmolue, bowing to the earth. By the way, Iwas on the point of forgetting. When doth it please you that I shallapprehend the little sorceress?What sorceress?That gypsy girl you know, who comes every day to dance on the churchsquare, in spite of the official prohibition! She hath a demoniacgoat with horns of the devil, which reads, which writes, which knowsmathematics like Picatrix, and which would suffice to hang all Bohemia.The prosecution is all ready; twill soon be finished, I assure you! Apretty creature, on my soul, that dancer! The handsomest black eyes! TwoEgyptian carbuncles! When shall we begin?The archdeacon was excessively pale.I will tell you that hereafter, he stammered, in a voice that wasbarely articulate; then he resumed with an effort, Busy yourself withMarc Cenaine.Be at ease, said Charmolue with a smile; I’ll buckle him down againfor you on the leather bed when I get home. But tis a devil of a man;he wearies even Pierrat Torterue himself, who hath hands larger than myown. As that good Plautus saith,     _Nudus vinctus, centum pondo,     es quando pendes per pedes_.’The torture of the wheel and axle! Tis the most effectual! He shalltaste it!Dom Claude seemed absorbed in gloomy abstraction. He turned toCharmolue,Master PierratMaster Jacques, I mean, busy yourself with MarcCenaine.Yes, yes, Dom Claude. Poor man! he will have suffered like Mummol.What an idea to go to the witches’ sabbath! a butler of the Court ofAccounts, who ought to know Charlemagne text; _Stryga vel masea_!Inthe matter of the little girl,Smelarda, as they call her,I willawait your orders. Ah! as we pass through the portal, you will explainto me also the meaning of the gardener painted in relief, which one seesas one enters the church. Is it not the Sower? Hé! master, of what areyou thinking, pray?Dom Claude, buried in his own thoughts, no longer listened to him.Charmolue, following the direction of his glance, perceived that it wasfixed mechanically on the great spider web which draped the window.At that moment, a bewildered fly which was seeking the March sun, flungitself through the net and became entangled there. On the agitation ofhis web, the enormous spider made an abrupt move from his central cell,then with one bound, rushed upon the fly, which he folded together withhis fore antennae, while his hideous proboscis dug into the victimbead. Poor fly! said the king procurator in the ecclesiasticalcourt; and he raised his hand to save it. The archdeacon, as thoughroused with a start, withheld his arm with convulsive violence.Master Jacques, he cried, let fate take its course! The procuratorwheeled round in affright; it seemed to him that pincers of iron hadclutched his arm. The priest eye was staring, wild, flaming, andremained riveted on the horrible little group of the spider and the fly.Oh, yes! continued the priest, in a voice which seemed to proceed fromthe depths of his being, behold here a symbol of all. She flies, she isjoyous, she is just born; she seeks the spring, the open air, liberty:oh, yes! but let her come in contact with the fatal network, andthe spider issues from it, the hideous spider! Poor dancer! poor,predestined fly! Let things take their course, Master Jacques, tisfate! Alas! Claude, thou art the spider! Claude, thou art the fly also!Thou wert flying towards learning, light, the sun. Thou hadst no othercare than to reach the open air, the full daylight of eternal truth; butin precipitating thyself towards the dazzling window which opens uponthe other world,upon the world of brightness, intelligence, andscienceblind fly! senseless, learned man! thou hast not perceivedthat subtle spider web, stretched by destiny betwixt the lightand theethou hast flung thyself headlong into it, and now thou artstruggling with head broken and mangled wings between the iron antennaeof fate! Master Jacques! Master Jacques! let the spider work its will!I assure you, said Charmolue, who was gazing at him withoutcomprehending him, that I will not touch it. But release my arm,master, for pity sake! You have a hand like a pair of pincers.The archdeacon did not hear him. Oh, madman! he went on, withoutremoving his gaze from the window. And even couldst thou have brokenthrough that formidable web, with thy gnat wings, thou believest thatthou couldst have reached the light? Alas! that pane of glass which isfurther on, that transparent obstacle, that wall of crystal, harder thanbrass, which separates all philosophies from the truth, how wouldst thouhave overcome it? Oh, vanity of science! how many wise men come flyingfrom afar, to dash their heads against thee! How many systems vainlyfling themselves buzzing against that eternal pane!He became silent. These last ideas, which had gradually led him backfrom himself to science, appeared to have calmed him. Jacques Charmoluerecalled him wholly to a sense of reality by addressing to him thisquestion: Come, now, master, when will you come to aid me in makinggold? I am impatient to succeed.The archdeacon shook his head, with a bitter smile. Master Jacques readMichel Psellus’ _Dialogus de Energia et Operatione Daemonum_.’ What weare doing is not wholly innocent.Speak lower, master! I have my suspicions of it, said JacquesCharmolue. But one must practise a bit of hermetic science when oneis only procurator of the king in the ecclesiastical court, at thirtycrowns tournois a year. Only speak low.At that moment the sound of jaws in the act of mastication, whichproceeded from beneath the furnace, struck Charmolue uneasy ear.What that? he inquired.It was the scholar, who, ill at ease, and greatly bored in hishidingplace, had succeeded in discovering there a stale crust and atriangle of mouldy cheese, and had set to devouring the whole withoutceremony, by way of consolation and breakfast. As he was very hungry,he made a great deal of noise, and he accented each mouthful strongly,which startled and alarmed the procurator.Tis a cat of mine, said the archdeacon, quickly, who is regalingherself under there with a mouse.This explanation satisfied Charmolue.In fact, master, he replied, with a respectful smile, all greatphilosophers have their familiar animal. You know what Servius saith:_Nullus enim locus sine genio est_,for there is no place that hathnot its spirit.’But Dom Claude, who stood in terror of some new freak on the part ofJehan, reminded his worthy disciple that they had some figures onthe façade to study together, and the two quitted the cell, to theaccompaniment of a great ouf! from the scholar, who began to seriouslyfear that his knee would acquire the imprint of his chin.CHAPTER VI. THE EFFECT WHICH SEVEN OATHS IN THE OPEN AIR CAN PRODUCE._Te Deum Laudamus_! exclaimed Master Jehan, creeping out from hishole, the screechowls have departed. Och! och! Hax! pax! max! fleas!mad dogs! the devil! I have had enough of their conversation! My headis humming like a bell tower. And mouldy cheese to boot! Come on! Let usdescend, take the big brother purse and convert all these coins intobottles!He cast a glance of tenderness and admiration into the interior of theprecious pouch, readjusted his toilet, rubbed up his boots, dusted hispoor half sleeves, all gray with ashes, whistled an air, indulged in asportive pirouette, looked about to see whether there were not somethingmore in the cell to take, gathered up here and there on the furnace someamulet in glass which might serve to bestow, in the guise of a trinket,on Isabeau la Thierrye, finally pushed open the door which his brotherhad left unfastened, as a last indulgence, and which he, in histurn, left open as a last piece of malice, and descended the circularstaircase, skipping like a bird.In the midst of the gloom of the spiral staircase, he elbowed somethingwhich drew aside with a growl; he took it for granted that it wasQuasimodo, and it struck him as so droll that he descended the remainderof the staircase holding his sides with laughter. On emerging upon thePlace, he laughed yet more heartily.He stamped his foot when he found himself on the ground once again.Oh! said he, good and honorable pavement of Paris, cursed staircase,fit to put the angels of Jacob ladder out of breath! What was Ithinking of to thrust myself into that stone gimlet which pierces thesky; all for the sake of eating bearded cheese, and looking at thebelltowers of Paris through a hole in the wall!He advanced a few paces, and caught sight of the two screech owls,that is to say, Dom Claude and Master Jacques Charmolue, absorbed incontemplation before a carving on the façade. He approached them ontiptoe, and heard the archdeacon say in a low tone to Charmolue: TwasGuillaume de Paris who caused a Job to be carved upon this stone ofthe hue of lapislazuli, gilded on the edges. Job represents thephilosopher stone, which must also be tried and martyrized in orderto become perfect, as saith Raymond Lulle: _Sub conservatione formoespeciftoe salva anima_.That makes no difference to me, said Jehan, tis I who have thepurse.At that moment he heard a powerful and sonorous voice articulate behindhim a formidable series of oaths. _Sang Dieu! Ventre.Dieu! Bédieu!Corps de Dieu! Nombril de Belzebuth! Nom d’un pape! Come et tonnerre_.Upon my soul! exclaimed Jehan, that can only be my friend, CaptainPhoebus!This name of Phoebus reached the ears of the archdeacon at the momentwhen he was explaining to the king procurator the dragon which ishiding its tail in a bath, from which issue smoke and the head ofa king. Dom Claude started, interrupted himself and, to the greatamazement of Charmolue, turned round and beheld his brother Jehanaccosting a tall officer at the door of the Gondelaurier mansion.It was, in fact, Captain Phoebus de Châteaupers. He was backed upagainst a corner of the house of his betrothed and swearing like aheathen.By my faith! Captain Phoebus, said Jehan, taking him by the hand, youare cursing with admirable vigor.Horns and thunder! replied the captain.Horns and thunder yourself! replied the student. Come now, faircaptain, whence comes this overflow of fine words?Pardon me, good comrade Jehan, exclaimed Phoebus, shaking his hand, ahorse going at a gallop cannot halt short. Now, I was swearing at a hardgallop. I have just been with those prudes, and when I come forth, Ialways find my throat full of curses, I must spit them out or strangle,_ventre et tonnerre_!Will you come and drink? asked the scholar.This proposition calmed the captain.I’m willing, but I have no money.But I have!Bah! let see it!Jehan spread out the purse before the captain eyes, with dignity andsimplicity. Meanwhile, the archdeacon, who had abandoned the dumbfoundedCharmolue where he stood, had approached them and halted a few pacesdistant, watching them without their noticing him, so deeply were theyabsorbed in contemplation of the purse.Phoebus exclaimed: A purse in your pocket, Jehan! tis the moon in abucket of water, one sees it there but tis not there. There is nothingbut its shadow. Pardieu! let us wager that these are pebbles!Jehan replied coldly: Here are the pebbles wherewith I pave my fob!And without adding another word, he emptied the purse on a neighboringpost, with the air of a Roman saving his country.True God! muttered Phoebus, targes, bigblanks, little blanks,mailles, every two worth one of Tournay, farthings of Paris, real eagleliards! Tis dazzling!    An ancient copper coin, the fortyfourth part of a sou orthe twelfth part of a farthing.Jehan remained dignified and immovable. Several liards had rolled intothe mud; the captain in his enthusiasm stooped to pick them up. Jehanrestrained him.Fye, Captain Phoebus de Châteaupers!Phoebus counted the coins, and turning towards Jehan with solemnity, Doyou know, Jehan, that there are three and twenty sous parisis! whom haveyou plundered tonight, in the Street CutWeazand?Jehan flung back his blonde and curly head, and said, halfclosing hiseyes disdainfully,We have a brother who is an archdeacon and a fool._Corne de Dieu_! exclaimed Phoebus, the worthy man!Let us go and drink, said Jehan.Where shall we go? said Phoebus; To Eve Apple.’No, captain, to Ancient Science.’ An old woman sawing a baskethandle; tis a rebus, and I like that.   _Une vielle qui scie une anse_.A plague on rebuses, Jehan! the wine is better at Eve Apple’; andthen, beside the door there is a vine in the sun which cheers me while Iam drinking.Well! here goes for Eve and her apple, said the student, and takingPhoebus arm. By the way, my dear captain, you just mentioned the RueCoupeGueule That is a very bad form of speech; people are no longer sobarbarous. They say, CoupeGorge.    CutWeazand Street.   CutThroat Street.The two friends set out towards Eve Apple. It is unnecessaryto mention that they had first gathered up the money, and that thearchdeacon followed them.The archdeacon followed them, gloomy and haggard. Was this the Phoebuswhose accursed name had been mingled with all his thoughts ever sincehis interview with Gringoire? He did not know it, but it was at least aPhoebus, and that magic name sufficed to make the archdeacon follow thetwo heedless comrades with the stealthy tread of a wolf, listeningto their words and observing their slightest gestures with anxiousattention. Moreover, nothing was easier than to hear everything theysaid, as they talked loudly, not in the least concerned that thepassersby were taken into their confidence. They talked of duels,wenches, wine pots, and folly.At the turning of a street, the sound of a tambourine reached them froma neighboring square. Dom Claude heard the officer say to the scholar,Thunder! Let us hasten our steps!Why, Phoebus?I’m afraid lest the Bohemian should see me.What Bohemian?The little girl with the goat.La Smeralda?That it, Jehan. I always forget her devil of a name. Let us makehaste, she will recognize me. I don’t want to have that girl accost mein the street.Do you know her, Phoebus?Here the archdeacon saw Phoebus sneer, bend down to Jehan ear, and saya few words to him in a low voice; then Phoebus burst into a laugh, andshook his head with a triumphant air.Truly? said Jehan.Upon my soul! said Phoebus.This evening?This evening.Are you sure that she will come?Are you a fool, Jehan? Does one doubt such things?Captain Phoebus, you are a happy gendarme!The archdeacon heard the whole of this conversation. His teethchattered; a visible shiver ran through his whole body. He halted for amoment, leaned against a post like a drunken man, then followed the twomerry knaves.At the moment when he overtook them once more, they had changed theirconversation. He heard them singing at the top of their lungs theancient refrain,     _Les enfants des PetitsCarreaux     Se font pendre cornme des veaux_.   The children of the Petits Carreaux let themselves be hunglike calves.CHAPTER VII. THE MYSTERIOUS MONK.The illustrious wine shop of Eve Apple was situated in theUniversity, at the corner of the Rue de la Rondelle and the Rue de laBâtonnier. It was a very spacious and very low hail on the ground floor,with a vaulted ceiling whose central spring rested upon a huge pillar ofwood painted yellow; tables everywhere, shining pewter jugs hanging onthe walls, always a large number of drinkers, a plenty of wenches, awindow on the street, a vine at the door, and over the door a flaringpiece of sheetiron, painted with an apple and a woman, rusted bythe rain and turning with the wind on an iron pin. This species ofweathervane which looked upon the pavement was the signboard.Night was falling; the square was dark; the wineshop, full of candles,flamed afar like a forge in the gloom; the noise of glasses andfeasting, of oaths and quarrels, which escaped through the broken panes,was audible. Through the mist which the warmth of the room spread overthe window in front, a hundred confused figures could be seen swarming,and from time to time a burst of noisy laughter broke forth from it.The passersby who were going about their business, slipped past thistumultuous window without glancing at it. Only at intervals did somelittle ragged boy raise himself on tiptoe as far as the ledge, and hurlinto the drinkingshop, that ancient, jeering hoot, with which drunkenmen were then pursued: Aux Houls, saouls, saouls, saouls!Nevertheless, one man paced imperturbably back and forth in front of thetavern, gazing at it incessantly, and going no further from it than apikernan from his sentrybox. He was enveloped in a mantle to his verynose. This mantle he had just purchased of the oldclothes man, in thevicinity of the Eve Apple, no doubt to protect himself from the coldof the March evening, possibly also, to conceal his costume. From timeto time he paused in front of the dim window with its leaden lattice,listened, looked, and stamped his foot.At length the door of the dramshop opened. This was what he appeared tobe waiting for. Two boon companions came forth. The ray of light whichescaped from the door crimsoned for a moment their jovial faces.The man in the mantle went and stationed himself on the watch under aporch on the other side of the street._Corne et tonnerre_! said one of the comrades. Seven o’clock is onthe point of striking. Tis the hour of my appointed meeting.I tell you, repeated his companion, with a thick tongue, that I don’tlive in the Rue des Mauvaises Paroles, _indignus qui inter mala verbahabitat_. I have a lodging in the Rue JeanPainMollet, _in vicoJohannis PainMollet_. You are more horned than a unicorn if you assertthe contrary. Every one knows that he who once mounts astride a bearis never after afraid; but you have a nose turned to dainties likeSaintJacques of the hospital.Jehan, my friend, you are drunk, said the other.The other replied staggering, It pleases you to say so, Phoebus; but ithath been proved that Plato had the profile of a hound.The reader has, no doubt, already recognized our two brave friends, thecaptain and the scholar. It appears that the man who was lying inwait for them had also recognized them, for he slowly followed all thezigzags that the scholar caused the captain to make, who being a morehardened drinker had retained all his selfpossession. By listening tothem attentively, the man in the mantle could catch in its entirety thefollowing interesting conversation,_Corbacque_! Do try to walk straight, master bachelor; you know that Imust leave you. Here it is seven o’clock. I have an appointment with awoman.Leave me then! I see stars and lances of fire. You are like the Chateaude Dampmartin, which is bursting with laughter.By the warts of my grandmother, Jehan, you are raving with too muchrabidness. By the way, Jehan, have you any money left?Monsieur Rector, there is no mistake; the little butcher shop, _parvaboucheria_.Jehau! my friend Jehan! You know that I made an appointment with thatlittle girl at the end of the Pont SaintMichel, and I can only take herto the Falourdel, the old crone of the bridge, and that I must payfor a chamber. The old witch with a white moustache would not trust me.Jehan! for pity sake! Have we drunk up the whole of the curé purse?Have you not a single parisis left?The consciousness of having spent the other hours well is a just andsavory condiment for the table.Belly and guts! a truce to your whimsical nonsense! Tell me, Jehan ofthe devil! have you any money left? Give it to me, _bédieu_! or I willsearch you, were you as leprous as Job, and as scabby as Caesar!Monsieur, the Rue Galiache is a street which hath at one end the Rue dela Verrerie, and at the other the Rue de la Tixeranderie.Well, yes! my good friend Jehan, my poor comrade, the Rue Galiache isgood, very good. But in the name of heaven collect your wits. I musthave a sou parisis, and the appointment is for seven o’clock.Silence for the rondo, and attention to the refrain,     _Quand les rats mangeront les cas,     Le roi sera seigneur d’Arras;     Quand la mer, qui est grande et le(e     Sera a la SaintJean gele(e,     On verra, pardessus la glace,     Sortir ceux d’Arras de leur place_.    When the rats eat the cats, the king will be lord of Arras;when the sea which is great and wide, is frozen over at St. John tide,men will see across the ice, those who dwell in Arras quit their place.Well, scholar of Antichrist, may you be strangled with the entrails ofyour mother! exclaimed Phoebus, and he gave the drunken scholar a roughpush; the latter slipped against the wall, and slid flabbily to thepavement of Philip Augustus. A remnant of fraternal pity, which neverabandons the heart of a drinker, prompted Phoebus to roll Jehan with hisfoot upon one of those pillows of the poor, which Providence keeps inreadiness at the corner of all the street posts of Paris, and whichthe rich blight with the name of a rubbishheap. The captain adjustedJehan head upon an inclined plane of cabbagestumps, and on the veryinstant, the scholar fell to snoring in a magnificent bass. Meanwhile,all malice was not extinguished in the captain heart. So much theworse if the devil cart picks you up on its passage! he said to thepoor, sleeping clerk; and he strode off.The man in the mantle, who had not ceased to follow him, halted for amoment before the prostrate scholar, as though agitated by indecision;then, uttering a profound sigh, he also strode off in pursuit of thecaptain.We, like them, will leave Jehan to slumber beneath the open sky, andwill follow them also, if it pleases the reader.On emerging into the Rue SaintAndrédesArcs, Captain Phoebus perceivedthat some one was following him. On glancing sideways by chance, heperceived a sort of shadow crawling after him along the walls. Hehalted, it halted; he resumed his march, it resumed its march. Thisdisturbed him not overmuch. Ah, bah! he said to himself, I have not asou.He paused in front of the College d’Autun. It was at this college thathe had sketched out what he called his studies, and, through a scholarteasing habit which still lingered in him, he never passed the façadewithout inflicting on the statue of Cardinal Pierre Bertrand, sculpturedto the right of the portal, the affront of which Priapus complains sobitterly in the satire of Horace, _Olim truncus eram ficulnus_. Hehad done this with so much unrelenting animosity that the inscription,_Eduensis episcopus_, had become almost effaced. Therefore, he haltedbefore the statue according to his wont. The street was utterlydeserted. At the moment when he was coolly retying his shoulder knots,with his nose in the air, he saw the shadow approaching him with slowsteps, so slow that he had ample time to observe that this shadow worea cloak and a hat. On arriving near him, it halted and remained moremotionless than the statue of Cardinal Bertrand. Meanwhile, it rivetedupon Phoebus two intent eyes, full of that vague light which issues inthe night time from the pupils of a cat.The captain was brave, and would have cared very little for ahighwayman, with a rapier in his hand. But this walking statue, thispetrified man, froze his blood. There were then in circulation, strangestories of a surly monk, a nocturnal prowler about the streets of Paris,and they recurred confusedly to his memory. He remained for severalminutes in stupefaction, and finally broke the silence with a forcedlaugh.Monsieur, if you are a robber, as I hope you are, you produce upon methe effect of a heron attacking a nutshell. I am the son of a ruinedfamily, my dear fellow. Try your hand near by here. In the chapel ofthis college there is some wood of the true cross set in silver.The hand of the shadow emerged from beneath its mantle and descendedupon the arm of Phoebus with the grip of an eagle talon; at the sametime the shadow spoke,Captain Phoebus de Châteaupers!What, the devil! said Phoebus, you know my name!I know not your name alone, continued the man in the mantle, with hissepulchral voice. You have a rendezvous this evening.Yes, replied Phoebus in amazement.At seven o’clock.In a quarter of an hour.At la Falourdel.Precisely.The lewd hag of the Pont SaintMichel.Of Saint Michel the archangel, as the Pater Noster saith.Impious wretch! muttered the spectre. With a woman?_Confiteor_,I confess.Who is called?La Smeralda, said Phoebus, gayly. All his heedlessness had graduallyreturned.At this name, the shadow grasp shook the arm of Phoebus in a fury.Captain Phoebus de Châteaupers, thou liest!Any one who could have beheld at that moment the captain inflamedcountenance, his leap backwards, so violent that he disengaged himselffrom the grip which held him, the proud air with which he clapped hishand on his swordhilt, and, in the presence of this wrath the gloomyimmobility of the man in the cloak,any one who could have beheld thiswould have been frightened. There was in it a touch of the combat of DonJuan and the statue.Christ and Satan! exclaimed the captain. That is a word which rarelystrikes the ear of a Châteaupers! Thou wilt not dare repeat it.Thou liest! said the shadow coldly.The captain gnashed his teeth. Surly monk, phantom, superstitions,hehad forgotten all at that moment. He no longer beheld anything but aman, and an insult.Ah! this is well! he stammered, in a voice stifled with rage. Hedrew his sword, then stammering, for anger as well as fear makes aman tremble: Here! On the spot! Come on! Swords! Swords! Blood on thepavement!But the other never stirred. When he beheld his adversary on guard andready to parry,Captain Phoebus, he said, and his tone vibrated with bitterness, youforget your appointment.The rages of men like Phoebus are milksoups, whose ebullition is calmedby a drop of cold water. This simple remark caused the sword whichglittered in the captain hand to be lowered.Captain, pursued the man, tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, a monthhence, ten years hence, you will find me ready to cut your throat; butgo first to your rendezvous.In sooth, said Phoebus, as though seeking to capitulate with himself,these are two charming things to be encountered in a rendezvous,asword and a wench; but I do not see why I should miss the one for thesake of the other, when I can have both.He replaced his sword in its scabbard.Go to your rendezvous, said the man.Monsieur, replied Phoebus with some embarrassment, many thanks foryour courtesy. In fact, there will be ample time tomorrow for us tochop up father Adam doublet into slashes and buttonholes. I am obligedto you for allowing me to pass one more agreeable quarter of an hour.I certainly did hope to put you in the gutter, and still arrive in timefor the fair one, especially as it has a better appearance to make thewomen wait a little in such cases. But you strike me as having the airof a gallant man, and it is safer to defer our affair until tomorrow.So I will betake myself to my rendezvous; it is for seven o’clock, asyou know. Here Phoebus scratched his ear. Ah. _Corne Dieu_! I hadforgotten! I haven’t a sou to discharge the price of the garret, and theold crone will insist on being paid in advance. She distrusts me.Here is the wherewithal to pay.Phoebus felt the stranger cold hand slip into his a large piece ofmoney. He could not refrain from taking the money and pressing the hand._Vrai Dieu_! he exclaimed, you are a good fellow!One condition, said the man. Prove to me that I have been wrong andthat you were speaking the truth. Hide me in some corner whence I cansee whether this woman is really the one whose name you uttered.Oh! replied Phoebus, tis all one to me. We will take, theSainteMarthe chamber; you can look at your ease from the kennel hardby.Come then, said the shadow.At your service, said the captain, I know not whether you areMesser Diavolus in person; but let us be good friends for this evening;tomorrow I will repay you all my debts, both of purse and sword.They set out again at a rapid pace. At the expiration of a few minutes,the sound of the river announced to them that they were on the PontSaintMichel, then loaded with houses.I will first show you the way, said Phoebus to his companion, Iwill then go in search of the fair one who is awaiting me near thePetitChâtelet.His companion made no reply; he had not uttered a word since they hadbeen walking side by side. Phoebus halted before a low door, and knockedroughly; a light made its appearance through the cracks of the door.Who is there? cried a toothless voice._CorpsDieu! TêteDieu! VentreDieu_! replied the captain.The door opened instantly, and allowed the newcorners to see an oldwoman and an old lamp, both of which trembled. The old woman was bentdouble, clad in tatters, with a shaking head, pierced with two smalleyes, and coiffed with a dish clout; wrinkled everywhere, on hands andface and neck; her lips retreated under her gums, and about her mouthshe had tufts of white hairs which gave her the whiskered look of a cat.The interior of the den was no less dilapitated than she; there werechalk walls, blackened beams in the ceiling, a dismantled chimneypiece,spiders’ webs in all the corners, in the middle a staggering herd oftables and lame stools, a dirty child among the ashes, and at the back astaircase, or rather, a wooden ladder, which ended in a trap door in theceiling.On entering this lair, Phoebus mysterious companion raised his mantleto his very eyes. Meanwhile, the captain, swearing like a Saracen,hastened to make the sun shine in a crown as saith our admirableRégnier.The SainteMarthe chamber, said he.The old woman addressed him as monseigneur, and shut up the crown in adrawer. It was the coin which the man in the black mantle had given toPhoebus. While her back was turned, the bushyheaded and ragged littleboy who was playing in the ashes, adroitly approached the drawer,abstracted the crown, and put in its place a dry leaf which he hadplucked from a fagot.The old crone made a sign to the two gentlemen, as she called them, tofollow her, and mounted the ladder in advance of them. On arriving atthe upper story, she set her lamp on a coffer, and, Phoebus, like afrequent visitor of the house, opened a door which opened on a darkhole. Enter here, my dear fellow, he said to his companion. The man inthe mantle obeyed without a word in reply, the door closed upon him; heheard Phoebus bolt it, and a moment later descend the stairs again withthe aged hag. The light had disappeared.CHAPTER VIII. THE UTILITY OF WINDOWS WHICH OPEN ON THE RIVER.Claude Frollo (for we presume that the reader, more intelligent thanPhoebus, has seen in this whole adventure no other surly monk than thearchdeacon), Claude Frollo groped about for several moments in the darklair into which the captain had bolted him. It was one of those nookswhich architects sometimes reserve at the point of junction betweenthe roof and the supporting wall. A vertical section of this kennel, asPhoebus had so justly styled it, would have made a triangle. Moreover,there was neither window nor airhole, and the slope of the roofprevented one from standing upright. Accordingly, Claude crouched downin the dust, and the plaster which cracked beneath him; his head was onfire; rummaging around him with his hands, he found on the floor abit of broken glass, which he pressed to his brow, and whose coolnessafforded him some relief.What was taking place at that moment in the gloomy soul of thearchdeacon? God and himself could alone know.In what order was he arranging in his mind la Esmeralda, Phoebus,Jacques Charmolue, his young brother so beloved, yet abandoned by him inthe mire, his archdeacon cassock, his reputation perhaps dragged to laFalourdel, all these adventures, all these images? I cannot say. Butit is certain that these ideas formed in his mind a horrible group.He had been waiting a quarter of an hour; it seemed to him that he hadgrown a century older. All at once he heard the creaking of the boardsof the stairway; some one was ascending. The trapdoor opened once more;a light reappeared. There was a tolerably large crack in the wormeatendoor of his den; he put his face to it. In this manner he could seeall that went on in the adjoining room. The catfaced old crone was thefirst to emerge from the trapdoor, lamp in hand; then Phoebus, twirlinghis moustache, then a third person, that beautiful and graceful figure,la Esmeralda. The priest beheld her rise from below like a dazzlingapparition. Claude trembled, a cloud spread over his eyes, his pulsesbeat violently, everything rustled and whirled around him; he no longersaw nor heard anything.When he recovered himself, Phoebus and Esmeralda were alone seated onthe wooden coffer beside the lamp which made these two youthful figuresand a miserable pallet at the end of the attic stand out plainly beforethe archdeacon eyes.Beside the pallet was a window, whose panes broken like a spider webupon which rain has fallen, allowed a view, through its rent meshes, ofa corner of the sky, and the moon lying far away on an eiderdown bed ofsoft clouds.The young girl was blushing, confused, palpitating. Her long, droopinglashes shaded her crimson cheeks. The officer, to whom she darednot lift her eyes, was radiant. Mechanically, and with a charminglyunconscious gesture, she traced with the tip of her finger incoherentlines on the bench, and watched her finger. Her foot was not visible.The little goat was nestling upon it.The captain was very gallantly clad; he had tufts of embroidery at hisneck and wrists; a great elegance at that day.It was not without difficulty that Dom Claude managed to hear what theywere saying, through the humming of the blood, which was boiling in histemples.(A conversation between lovers is a very commonplace affair. It is aperpetual I love you. A musical phrase which is very insipid and verybald for indifferent listeners, when it is not ornamented with some_fioriture_; but Claude was not an indifferent listener.)Oh! said the young girl, without raising her eyes, do not despise me,monseigneur Phoebus. I feel that what I am doing is not right.Despise you, my pretty child! replied the officer with an air ofsuperior and distinguished gallantry, despise you, _têteDieu_! andwhy?For having followed you!On that point, my beauty, we don’t agree. I ought not to despise you,but to hate you.The young girl looked at him in affright: Hate me! what have I done?For having required so much urging.Alas! said she, tis because I am breaking a vow. I shall not find myparents! The amulet will lose its virtue. But what matters it? What needhave I of father or mother now?So saying, she fixed upon the captain her great black eyes, moist withjoy and tenderness.Devil take me if I understand you! exclaimed Phoebus. La Esmeraldaremained silent for a moment, then a tear dropped from her eyes, a sighfrom her lips, and she said,Oh! monseigneur, I love you.Such a perfume of chastity, such a charm of virtue surrounded the younggirl, that Phoebus did not feel completely at his ease beside her. Butthis remark emboldened him: You love me! he said with rapture, and hethrew his arm round the gypsy waist. He had only been waiting for thisopportunity.The priest saw it, and tested with the tip of his finger the point of aponiard which he wore concealed in his breast.Phoebus, continued the Bohemian, gently releasing her waist from thecaptain tenacious hands, You are good, you are generous, you arehandsome; you saved me, me who am only a poor child lost in Bohemia. Ihad long been dreaming of an officer who should save my life. Twas ofyou that I was dreaming, before I knew you, my Phoebus; the officer ofmy dream had a beautiful uniform like yours, a grand look, a sword; yourname is Phoebus; tis a beautiful name. I love your name; I love yoursword. Draw your sword, Phoebus, that I may see it.Child! said the captain, and he unsheathed his sword with a smile.The gypsy looked at the hilt, the blade; examined the cipher on theguard with adorable curiosity, and kissed the sword, saying,You are the sword of a brave man. I love my captain. Phoebus againprofited by the opportunity to impress upon her beautiful bent neck akiss which made the young girl straighten herself up as scarlet as apoppy. The priest gnashed his teeth over it in the dark.Phoebus, resumed the gypsy, let me talk to you. Pray walk a little,that I may see you at full height, and that I may hear your spursjingle. How handsome you are!The captain rose to please her, chiding her with a smile ofsatisfaction,What a child you are! By the way, my charmer, have you seen me in myarcher ceremonial doublet?Alas! no, she replied.It is very handsome!Phoebus returned and seated himself beside her, but much closer thanbefore.Listen, my dearThe gypsy gave him several little taps with her pretty hand on hismouth, with a childish mirth and grace and gayety.No, no, I will not listen to you. Do you love me? I want you to tell mewhether you love me.Do I love thee, angel of my life! exclaimed the captain, halfkneeling. My body, my blood, my soul, all are thine; all are for thee.I love thee, and I have never loved any one but thee.The captain had repeated this phrase so many times, in many similarconjunctures, that he delivered it all in one breath, without committinga single mistake. At this passionate declaration, the gypsy raised tothe dirty ceiling which served for the skies a glance full of angelichappiness.Oh! she murmured, this is the moment when one should die!Phoebus found the moment favorable for robbing her of another kiss,which went to torture the unhappy archdeacon in his nook. Die! exclaimed the amorous captain, What are you saying, my lovely angel?Tis a time for living, or Jupiter is only a scamp! Die at the beginningof so sweet a thing! _Cornedeboeuf_, what a jest! It is not that.Listen, my dear Similar, EsmenardaPardon! you have so prodigiouslySaracen a name that I never can get it straight. Tis a thicket whichstops me short.Good heavens! said the poor girl, and I thought my name prettybecause of its singularity! But since it displeases you, I would that Iwere called Goton.Ah! do not weep for such a trifle, my graceful maid! tis a name towhich one must get accustomed, that is all. When I once know it byheart, all will go smoothly. Listen then, my dear Similar; I adore youpassionately. I love you so that tis simply miraculous. I know a girlwho is bursting with rage over itThe jealous girl interrupted him: Who?What matters that to us? said Phoebus; do you love me?Oh!said she.Well! that is all. You shall see how I love you also. May the greatdevil Neptunus spear me if I do not make you the happiest woman in theworld. We will have a pretty little house somewhere. I will make myarchers parade before your windows. They are all mounted, and set atdefiance those of Captain Mignon. There are _voulgiers, cranequiniers_and hand _couleveiniers_. I will take you to the great sights of theParisians at the storehouse of Rully. Eighty thousand armed men, thirtythousand white harnesses, short coats or coats of mail; the sixtysevenbanners of the trades; the standards of the parliaments, of the chamberof accounts, of the treasury of the generals, of the aides of the mint;a devilish fine array, in short! I will conduct you to see the lions ofthe Hôtel du Roi, which are wild beasts. All women love that.   Varieties of the crossbow.For several moments the young girl, absorbed in her charming thoughts,was dreaming to the sound of his voice, without listening to the senseof his words.Oh! how happy you will be! continued the captain, and at the same timehe gently unbuckled the gypsy girdle.What are you doing? she said quickly. This act of violence hadroused her from her revery.Nothing, replied Phoebus, I was only saying that you must abandon allthis garb of folly, and the street corner when you are with me.When I am with you, Phoebus! said the young girl tenderly.She became pensive and silent once more.The captain, emboldened by her gentleness, clasped her waist withoutresistance; then began softly to unlace the poor child corsage, anddisarranged her tucker to such an extent that the panting priest beheldthe gypsy beautiful shoulder emerge from the gauze, as round and brownas the moon rising through the mists of the horizon.The young girl allowed Phoebus to have his way. She did not appear toperceive it. The eye of the bold captain flashed.Suddenly she turned towards him,Phoebus, she said, with an expression of infinite love, instruct mein thy religion.My religion! exclaimed the captain, bursting with laughter, Iinstruct you in my religion! _Corne et tonnerre_! What do you want withmy religion?In order that we may be married, she replied.The captain face assumed an expression of mingled surprise anddisdain, of carelessness and libertine passion.Ah, bah! said he, do people marry?The Bohemian turned pale, and her head drooped sadly on her breast.My beautiful love, resumed Phoebus, tenderly, what nonsense is this?A great thing is marriage, truly! one is none the less loving for nothaving spit Latin into a priest shop!While speaking thus in his softest voice, he approached extremely nearthe gypsy; his caressing hands resumed their place around her supple anddelicate waist, his eye flashed more and more, and everything announcedthat Monsieur Phoebus was on the verge of one of those moments whenJupiter himself commits so many follies that Homer is obliged to summona cloud to his rescue.But Dom Claude saw everything. The door was made of thoroughly rottencask staves, which left large apertures for the passage of his hawklikegaze. This brownskinned, broadshouldered priest, hitherto condemned tothe austere virginity of the cloister, was quivering and boiling in thepresence of this night scene of love and voluptuousness. This youngand beautiful girl given over in disarray to the ardent young man, mademelted lead flow in hisveins; his eyes darted with sensual jealousybeneath all those loosened pins. Any one who could, at that moment, haveseen the face of the unhappy man glued to the wormeaten bars, would havethought that he beheld the face of a tiger glaring from the depths ofa cage at some jackal devouring a gazelle. His eye shone like a candlethrough the cracks of the door.All at once, Phoebus, with a rapid gesture, removed the gypsygorgerette. The poor child, who had remained pale and dreamy, awokewith a start; she recoiled hastily from the enterprising officer, and,casting a glance at her bare neck and shoulders, red, confused, mutewith shame, she crossed her two beautiful arms on her breast to concealit. Had it not been for the flame which burned in her cheeks, at thesight of her so silent and motionless, one would have declared her astatue of Modesty. Her eyes were lowered.But the captain gesture had revealed the mysterious amulet which shewore about her neck.What is that? he said, seizing this pretext to approach once more thebeautiful creature whom he had just alarmed.Don’t touch it! she replied, quickly, tis my guardian. It will makeme find my family again, if I remain worthy to do so. Oh, leave me,monsieur le capitaine! My mother! My poor mother! My mother! Where artthou? Come to my rescue! Have pity, Monsieur Phoebus, give me back mygorgerette!Phoebus retreated amid said in a cold tone,Oh, mademoiselle! I see plainly that you do not love me!I do not love him! exclaimed the unhappy child, and at the same timeshe clung to the captain, whom she drew to a seat beside her. I do notlove thee, my Phoebus? What art thou saying, wicked man, to break myheart? Oh, take me! take all! do what you will with me, I am thine. Whatmatters to me the amulet! What matters to me my mother! Tis thou whoart my mother since I love thee! Phoebus, my beloved Phoebus, dost thousee me? Tis I. Look at me; tis the little one whom thou wilt surelynot repulse, who comes, who comes herself to seek thee. My soul, mylife, my body, my person, all is one thingwhich is thine, my captain.Well, no! We will not marry, since that displeases thee; and then, whatam I? a miserable girl of the gutters; whilst thou, my Phoebus, art agentleman. A fine thing, truly! A dancer wed an officer! I was mad. No,Phoebus, no; I will be thy mistress, thy amusement, thy pleasure, whenthou wilt; a girl who shall belong to thee. I was only made for that,soiled, despised, dishonored, but what matters it?beloved. I shall bethe proudest and the most joyous of women. And when I grow old or ugly,Phoebus, when I am no longer good to love you, you will suffer me toserve you still. Others will embroider scarfs for you; tis I, theservant, who will care for them. You will let me polish your spurs,brush your doublet, dust your ridingboots. You will have that pity,will you not, Phoebus? Meanwhile, take me! here, Phoebus, all thisbelongs to thee, only love me! We gypsies need only air and love.So saying, she threw her arms round the officer neck; she looked upat him, supplicatingly, with a beautiful smile, and all in tears.Her delicate neck rubbed against his cloth doublet with its roughembroideries. She writhed on her knees, her beautiful body half naked.The intoxicated captain pressed his ardent lips to those lovely Africanshoulders. The young girl, her eyes bent on the ceiling, as she leanedbackwards, quivered, all palpitating, beneath this kiss.All at once, above Phoebus head she beheld another head; a green,livid, convulsed face, with the look of a lost soul; near this face wasa hand grasping a poniard.It was the face and hand of the priest; hehad broken the door and he was there. Phoebus could not see him. Theyoung girl remained motionless, frozen with terror, dumb, beneath thatterrible apparition, like a dove which should raise its head at themoment when the hawk is gazing into her nest with its round eyes.She could not even utter a cry. She saw the poniard descend uponPhoebus, and rise again, reeking.Maledictions! said the captain, and fell.She fainted.At the moment when her eyes closed, when all feeling vanished in her,she thought that she felt a touch of fire imprinted upon her lips, akiss more burning than the redhot iron of the executioner.When she recovered her senses, she was surrounded by soldiers of thewatch they were carrying away the captain, bathed in his blood thepriest had disappeared; the window at the back of the room which openedon the river was wide open; they picked up a cloak which they supposedto belong to the officer and she heard them saying around her,Tis a sorceress who has stabbed a captain.BOOK EIGHTH.CHAPTER I. THE CROWN CHANGED INTO A DRY LEAF.Gringoire and the entire Court of Miracles were suffering mortalanxiety. For a whole month they had not known what had become of laEsmeralda, which greatly pained the Duke of Egypt and his friends thevagabonds, nor what had become of the goat, which redoubled Gringoiregrief. One evening the gypsy had disappeared, and since that time hadgiven no signs of life. All search had proved fruitless. Some tormentingbootblacks had told Gringoire about meeting her that same evening nearthe Pont SaintMichel, going off with an officer; but this husband,after the fashion of Bohemia, was an incredulous philosopher, andbesides, he, better than any one else, knew to what a point his wife wasvirginal. He had been able to form a judgment as to the unconquerablemodesty resulting from the combined virtues of the amulet and the gypsy,and he had mathematically calculated the resistance of that chastity tothe second power. Accordingly, he was at ease on that score.Still he could not understand this disappearance. It was a profoundsorrow. He would have grown thin over it, had that been possible. He hadforgotten everything, even his literary tastes, even his great work,_De figuris regularibus et irregularibus_, which it was his intentionto have printed with the first money which he should procure (for he hadraved over printing, ever since he had seen the Didascalon of Huguesde Saint Victor, printed with the celebrated characters of Vindelin deSpire).One day, as he was passing sadly before the criminal Tournelle, heperceived a considerable crowd at one of the gates of the Palais deJustice.What is this? he inquired of a young man who was coming out.I know not, sir, replied the young man. Tis said that they aretrying a woman who hath assassinated a gendarme. It appears that thereis sorcery at the bottom of it, the archbishop and the official haveintervened in the case, and my brother, who is the archdeacon of Josas,can think of nothing else. Now, I wished to speak with him, but Ihave not been able to reach him because of the throng, which vexes megreatly, as I stand in need of money.Alas! sir, said Gringoire, I would that I could lend you some, but,my breeches are worn to holes, and tis not crowns which have done it.He dared not tell the young man that he was acquainted with his brotherthe archdeacon, to whom he had not returned after the scene in thechurch; a negligence which embarrassed him.The scholar went his way, and Gringoire set out to follow the crowdwhich was mounting the staircase of the great chamber. In his opinion,there was nothing like the spectacle of a criminal process fordissipating melancholy, so exhilaratingly stupid are judges as a rule.The populace which he had joined walked and elbowed in silence. Aftera slow and tiresome march through a long, gloomy corridor, whichwound through the courthouse like the intestinal canal of the ancientedifice, he arrived near a low door, opening upon a hall which his loftystature permitted him to survey with a glance over the waving heads ofthe rabble.The hall was vast and gloomy, which latter fact made it appear stillmore spacious. The day was declining; the long, pointed windowspermitted only a pale ray of light to enter, which was extinguishedbefore it reached the vaulted ceiling, an enormous trelliswork ofsculptured beams, whose thousand figures seemed to move confusedly inthe shadows, many candles were already lighted here and there on tables,and beaming on the heads of clerks buried in masses of documents. Theanterior portion of the ball was occupied by the crowd; on the right andleft were magistrates and tables; at the end, upon a platform, anumber of judges, whose rear rank sank into the shadows, sinister andmotionless faces. The walls were sown with innumerable fleursdelis. Alarge figure of Christ might be vaguely descried above the judges,and everywhere there were pikes and halberds, upon whose points thereflection of the candles placed tips of fire.Monsieur, Gringoire inquired of one of his neighbors, who are allthose persons ranged yonder, like prelates in council?Monsieur, replied the neighbor, those on the right are thecounsellors of the grand chamber; those on the left, the councillors ofinquiry; the masters in black gowns, the messires in red.Who is that big red fellow, yonder above them, who is sweating? pursued Gringoire.It is monsieur the president.And those sheep behind him? continued Gringoire, who as we have seen,did not love the magistracy, which arose, possibly, from the grudgewhich he cherished against the Palais de Justice since his dramaticmisadventure.They are messieurs the masters of requests of the king household.And that boar in front of him?He is monsieur the clerk of the Court of Parliament.And that crocodile on the right?Master Philippe Lheulier, advocate extraordinary of the king.And that big, black tomcat on the left?Master Jacques Charmolue, procurator of the king in the EcclesiasticalCourt, with the gentlemen of the officialty.Come now, monsieur, said Gringoire, pray what are all those finefellows doing yonder?They are judging.Judging whom? I do not see the accused.Tis a woman, sir. You cannot see her. She has her back turned to us,and she is hidden from us by the crowd. Stay, yonder she is, where yousee a group of partisans.Who is the woman? asked Gringoire. Do you know her name?No, monsieur, I have but just arrived. I merely assume that there issome sorcery about it, since the official is present at the trial.Come! said our philosopher, we are going to see all these magistratesdevour human flesh. Tis as good a spectacle as any other.Monsieur, remarked his neighbor, think you not, that Master JacquesCharmolue has a very sweet air?Hum! replied Gringoire. I distrust a sweetness which hath pinchednostrils and thin lips.Here the bystanders imposed silence upon the two chatterers. They werelistening to an important deposition.Messeigneurs, said an old woman in the middle of the hall, whose formwas so concealed beneath her garments that one would have pronounced hera walking heap of rags; Messeigneurs, the thing is as true as that Iam la Falourdel, established these forty years at the Pont Saint Michel,and paying regularly my rents, lord dues, and quit rents; at the gateopposite the house of TassinCaillart, the dyer, which is on the sideup the rivera poor old woman now, but a pretty maid in former days,my lords. Some one said to me lately, La Falourdel, don’t use yourspinningwheel too much in the evening; the devil is fond of combing thedistaffs of old women with his horns. Tis certain that the surly monkwho was round about the temple last year, now prowls in the City. Takecare, La Falourdel, that he doth not knock at your door.’ One evening Iwas spinning on my wheel, there comes a knock at my door; I ask who itis. They swear. I open. Two men enter. A man in black and a handsomeofficer. Of the black man nothing could be seen but his eyes, twocoals of fire. All the rest was hat and cloak. They say to me,TheSainteMarthe chamber.’Tis my upper chamber, my lords, my cleanest.They give me a crown. I put the crown in my drawer, and I say: Thisshall go to buy tripe at the slaughterhouse of la Gloriette tomorrow.’We go up stairs. On arriving at the upper chamber, and while my back isturned, the black man disappears. That dazed me a bit. The officer, whowas as handsome as a great lord, goes down stairs again with me. He goesout. In about the time it takes to spin a quarter of a handful of flax,he returns with a beautiful young girl, a doll who would have shone likethe sun had she been coiffed. She had with her a goat; a big billygoat,whether black or white, I no longer remember. That set me to thinking.The girl does not concern me, but the goat! I love not those beasts,they have a beard and horns. They are so like a man. And then, theysmack of the witches, sabbath. However, I say nothing. I had the crown.That is right, is it not, Monsieur Judge? I show the captain and thewench to the upper chamber, and I leave them alone; that is to say, withthe goat. I go down and set to spinning againI must inform you thatmy house has a ground floor and story above. I know not why I fell tothinking of the surly monk whom the goat had put into my head again, andthen the beautiful girl was rather strangely decked out. All at once,I hear a cry upstairs, and something falls on the floor and the windowopens. I run to mine which is beneath it, and I behold a black mass passbefore my eyes and fall into the water. It was a phantom clad likea priest. It was a moonlight night. I saw him quite plainly. He wasswimming in the direction of the city. Then, all of a tremble, I callthe watch. The gentlemen of the police enter, and not knowing just atthe first moment what the matter was, and being merry, they beat me. Iexplain to them. We go up stairs, and what do we find? my poor chamberall blood, the captain stretched out at full length with a dagger inhis neck, the girl pretending to be dead, and the goat all in a fright.Pretty work!’ I say, I shall have to wash that floor for more than afortnight. It will have to be scraped; it will be a terrible job.’ Theycarried off the officer, poor young man, and the wench with her bosomall bare. But wait, the worst is that on the next day, when I wanted totake the crown to buy tripe, I found a dead leaf in its place.The old woman ceased. A murmur of horror ran through the audience.That phantom, that goat,all smacks of magic, said one of Gringoireneighbors.And that dry leaf! added another.No doubt about it, joined in a third, she is a witch who has dealingswith the surly monk, for the purpose of plundering officers.Gringoire himself was not disinclined to regard this as altogetheralarming and probable.Goody Falourdel, said the president majestically, have you nothingmore to communicate to the court?No, monseigneur, replied the crone, except that the report hasdescribed my house as a hovel and stinking; which is an outrageousfashion of speaking. The houses on the bridge are not imposing, becausethere are such multitudes of people; but, nevertheless, the butcherscontinue to dwell there, who are wealthy folk, and married to veryproper and handsome women.The magistrate who had reminded Gringoire of a crocodile rose,Silence! said he. I pray the gentlemen not to lose sight of the factthat a dagger was found on the person of the accused. Goody Falourdel,have you brought that leaf into which the crown which the demon gave youwas transformed?Yes, monseigneur, she replied; I found it again. Here it is.A bailiff banded the dead leaf to the crocodile, who made a dolefulshake of the head, and passed it on to the president, who gave it to theprocurator of the king in the ecclesiastical court, and thus it made thecircuit of the hail.It is a birch leaf, said Master Jacques Charmolue. A fresh proof ofmagic.A counsellor took up the word.Witness, two men went upstairs together in your house: the black man,whom you first saw disappear and afterwards swimming in the Seine, withhis priestly garments, and the officer. Which of the two handed youthe crown? The old woman pondered for a moment and then said,Theofficer.A murmur ran through the crowd.Ah! thought Gringoire, this makes some doubt in my mind.But Master Philippe Lheulier, advocate extraordinary to the king,interposed once more.I will recall to these gentlemen, that in the deposition taken at hisbedside, the assassinated officer, while declaring that he had a vagueidea when the black man accosted him that the latter might be the surlymonk, added that the phantom had pressed him eagerly to go and makeacquaintance with the accused; and upon his, the captain, remarkingthat he had no money, he had given him the crown which the said officerpaid to la Falourdel. Hence, that crown is the money of hell.This conclusive observation appeared to dissipate all the doubts ofGringoire and the other sceptics in the audience.You have the documents, gentlemen, added the king advocate, ashe took his seat; you can consult the testimony of Phoebus deChâteaupers.At that name, the accused sprang up, her head rose above the throng.Gringoire with horror recognized la Esmeralda.She was pale; her tresses, formerly so gracefully braided and spangledwith sequins, hung in disorder; her lips were blue, her hollow eyes wereterrible. Alas!Phoebus! she said, in bewilderment; where is he? O messeigneurs!before you kill me, tell me, for pity sake, whether he still lives?Hold your tongue, woman, replied the president, that is no affair ofours.Oh! for mercy sake, tell me if he is alive! she repeated, claspingher beautiful emaciated hands; and the sound of her chains in contactwith her dress, was heard.Well! said the king advocate roughly, he is dying. Are yousatisfied?The unhappy girl fell back on her criminal seat, speechless, tearless,white as a wax figure.The president bent down to a man at his feet, who wore a gold cap and ablack gown, a chain on his neck and a wand in his hand.Bailiff, bring in the second accused.All eyes turned towards a small door, which opened, and, to the greatagitation of Gringoire, gave passage to a pretty goat with horns andhoofs of gold. The elegant beast halted for a moment on the threshold,stretching out its neck as though, perched on the summit of a rock, ithad before its eyes an immense horizon. Suddenly it caught sight of thegypsy girl, and leaping over the table and the head of a clerk, in twobounds it was at her knees; then it rolled gracefully on its mistressfeet, soliciting a word or a caress; but the accused remainedmotionless, and poor Djali himself obtained not a glance.Eh, whytis my villanous beast, said old Falourdel, I recognize thetwo perfectly!Jacques Charmolue interfered.If the gentlemen please, we will proceed to the examination of thegoat. He was, in fact, the second criminal. Nothing more simple inthose days than a suit of sorcery instituted against an animal. We find,among others in the accounts of the provost office for 1466, a curiousdetail concerning the expenses of the trial of GilletSoulart and hissow, executed for their demerits, at Corbeil. Everything is there, thecost of the pens in which to place the sow, the five hundred bundles ofbrushwood purchased at the port of Morsant, the three pints of wineand the bread, the last repast of the victim fraternally shared by theexecutioner, down to the eleven days of guard and food for the sow,at eight deniers parisis each. Sometimes, they went even further thananimals. The capitularies of Charlemagne and of Louis le Débonnaireimpose severe penalties on fiery phantoms which presume to appear in theair.Meanwhile the procurator had exclaimed: If the demon which possessesthis goat, and which has resisted all exorcisms, persists in its deedsof witchcraft, if it alarms the court with them, we warn it that weshall be forced to put in requisition against it the gallows or thestake. Gringoire broke out into a cold perspiration. Charmolue took fromthe table the gypsy tambourine, and presenting it to the goat, in acertain manner, asked the latter,What o’clock is it?The goat looked at it with an intelligent eye, raised its gilded hoof,and struck seven blows.It was, in fact, seven o’clock. A movement of terror ran through thecrowd.Gringoire could not endure it.He is destroying himself! he cried aloud; You see well that he doesnot know what he is doing.Silence among the louts at the end of the hail! said the bailiffsharply.Jacques Charmolue, by the aid of the same manoeuvres of the tambourine,made the goat perform many other tricks connected with the date ofthe day, the month of the year, etc., which the reader has alreadywitnessed. And, by virtue of an optical illusion peculiar to judicialproceedings, these same spectators who had, probably, more than onceapplauded in the public square Djali innocent magic were terrified byit beneath the roof of the Palais de Justice. The goat was undoubtedlythe devil.It was far worse when the procurator of the king, having emptied upon afloor a certain bag filled with movable letters, which Djali wore roundhis neck, they beheld the goat extract with his hoof from the scatteredalphabet the fatal name of Phoebus. The witchcraft of which the captainhad been the victim appeared irresistibly demonstrated, and in the eyesof all, the gypsy, that ravishing dancer, who had so often dazzledthe passersby with her grace, was no longer anything but a frightfulvampire.However, she betrayed no sign of life; neither Djali gracefulevolutions, nor the menaces of the court, nor the suppressedimprecations of the spectators any longer reached her mind.In order to arouse her, a police officer was obliged to shake herunmercifully, and the president had to raise his voice,Girl, youare of the Bohemian race, addicted to deeds of witchcraft. You, incomplicity with the bewitched goat implicated in this suit, duringthe night of the twentyninth of March last, murdered and stabbed, inconcert with the powers of darkness, by the aid of charms and underhandpractices, a captain of the king arches of the watch, Phoebus deChâteaupers. Do you persist in denying it?Horror! exclaimed the young girl, hiding her face in her hands. MyPhoebus! Oh, this is hell!Do you persist in your denial? demanded the president coldly.Do I deny it? she said with terrible accents; and she rose withflashing eyes.The president continued squarely,Then how do you explain the facts laid to your charge?She replied in a broken voice,I have already told you. I do not know. Twas a priest, a priest whom Ido not know; an infernal priest who pursues me!That is it, retorted the judge; the surly monk.Oh, gentlemen! have mercy! I am but a poor girlOf Egypt, said the judge.Master Jacques Charmolue interposed sweetly,In view of the sad obstinacy of the accused, I demand the applicationof the torture.Granted, said the president.The unhappy girl quivered in every limb. But she rose at the command ofthe men with partisans, and walked with a tolerably firm step, precededby Charmolue and the priests of the officiality, between two rows ofhalberds, towards a mediumsized door which suddenly opened and closedagain behind her, and which produced upon the griefstricken Gringoirethe effect of a horrible mouth which had just devoured her.When she disappeared, they heard a plaintive bleating; it was the littlegoat mourning.The sitting of the court was suspended. A counsellor having remarkedthat the gentlemen were fatigued, and that it would be a long timeto wait until the torture was at an end, the president replied that amagistrate must know how to sacrifice himself to his duty.What an annoying and vexatious hussy, said an aged judge, to getherself put to the question when one has not supped!CHAPTER II. CONTINUATION OF THE CROWN WHICH WAS CHANGED INTO A DRY LEAF.After ascending and descending several steps in the corridors, whichwere so dark that they were lighted by lamps at midday, La Esmeralda,still surrounded by her lugubrious escort, was thrust by the police intoa gloomy chamber. This chamber, circular in form, occupied the groundfloor of one of those great towers, which, even in our own century,still pierce through the layer of modern edifices with which modernParis has covered ancient Paris. There were no windows to this cellar;no other opening than the entrance, which was low, and closed by anenormous iron door. Nevertheless, light was not lacking; a furnace hadbeen constructed in the thickness of the wall; a large fire was lightedthere, which filled the vault with its crimson reflections and depriveda miserable candle, which stood in one corner, of all radiance. The irongrating which served to close the oven, being raised at that moment,allowed only a view at the mouth of the flaming venthole in the darkwall, the lower extremity of its bars, like a row of black and pointedteeth, set flat apart; which made the furnace resemble one of thosemouths of dragons which spout forth flames in ancient legends. By thelight which escaped from it, the prisoner beheld, all about the room,frightful instruments whose use she did not understand. In the centrelay a leather mattress, placed almost flat upon the ground, over whichhung a strap provided with a buckle, attached to a brass ring in themouth of a flatnosed monster carved in the keystone of the vault.Tongs, pincers, large ploughshares, filled the interior of the furnace,and glowed in a confused heap on the coals. The sanguine light of thefurnace illuminated in the chamber only a confused mass of horriblethings.This Tartarus was called simply, The Question Chamber.On the bed, in a negligent attitude, sat Pierrat Torterue, the officialtorturer. His underlings, two gnomes with square faces, leather aprons,and linen breeches, were moving the iron instruments on the coals.In vain did the poor girl summon up her courage; on entering thischamber she was stricken with horror.The sergeants of the bailiff of the courts drew up in line on one side,the priests of the officiality on the other. A clerk, inkhorn, and atable were in one corner.Master Jacques Charmolue approached the gypsy with a very sweet smile.My dear child, said he, do you still persist in your denial?Yes, she replied, in a dying voice.In that case, replied Charmolue, it will be very painful for us tohave to question you more urgently than we should like. Pray take thetrouble to seat yourself on this bed. Master Pierrat, make room formademoiselle, and close the door.Pierrat rose with a growl.If I shut the door, he muttered, my fire will go out.Well, my dear fellow, replied Charmolue, leave it open then.Meanwhile, la Esmeralda had remained standing. That leather bed on whichso many unhappy wretches had writhed, frightened her. Terror chilled thevery marrow of her bones; she stood there bewildered and stupefied. Ata sign from Charmolue, the two assistants took her and placed her ina sitting posture on the bed. They did her no harm; but when thesemen touched her, when that leather touched her, she felt all her bloodretreat to her heart. She cast a frightened look around the chamber. Itseemed to her as though she beheld advancing from all quarters towardsher, with the intention of crawling up her body and biting and pinchingher, all those hideous implements of torture, which as compared to theinstruments of all sorts she had hitherto seen, were like what bats,centipedes, and spiders are among insects and birds.Where is the physician? asked Charmolue.Here, replied a black gown whom she had not before noticed.She shuddered.Mademoiselle, resumed the caressing voice of the procucrator of theEcclesiastical court, for the third time, do you persist in denying thedeeds of which you are accused?This time she could only make a sign with her head.You persist? said Jacques Charmolue. Then it grieves me deeply, but Imust fulfil my office.Monsieur le Procureur du Roi, said Pierrat abruptly, How shall webegin?Charmolue hesitated for a moment with the ambiguous grimace of a poet insearch of a rhyme.With the boot, he said at last.The unfortunate girl felt herself so utterly abandoned by God and men,that her head fell upon her breast like an inert thing which has nopower in itself.The tormentor and the physician approached her simultaneously. Atthe same time, the two assistants began to fumble among their hideousarsenal.At the clanking of their frightful irons, the unhappy child quiveredlike a dead frog which is being galvanized. Oh! she murmured, so lowthat no one heard her; Oh, my Phoebus! Then she fell back once moreinto her immobility and her marble silence. This spectacle would haverent any other heart than those of her judges. One would have pronouncedher a poor sinful soul, being tortured by Satan beneath the scarletwicket of hell. The miserable body which that frightful swarm of saws,wheels, and racks were about to clasp in their clutches, the beingwho was about to be manipulated by the harsh hands of executionersand pincers, was that gentle, white, fragile creature, a poor grain ofmillet which human justice was handing over to the terrible mills oftorture to grind. Meanwhile, the callous hands of Pierrat Torterueassistants had bared that charming leg, that tiny foot, which had sooften amazed the passersby with their delicacy and beauty, in thesquares of Paris.Tis a shame! muttered the tormentor, glancing at these graceful anddelicate forms.Had the archdeacon been present, he certainly would have recalled atthat moment his symbol of the spider and the fly. Soon the unfortunategirl, through a mist which spread before her eyes, beheld the bootapproach; she soon beheld her foot encased between iron plates disappearin the frightful apparatus. Then terror restored her strength.Take that off! she cried angrily; and drawing herself up, with herhair all dishevelled: Mercy!She darted from the bed to fling herself at the feet of the kingprocurator, but her leg was fast in the heavy block of oak and iron, andshe sank down upon the boot, more crushed than a bee with a lump of leadon its wing.At a sign from Charmolue, she was replaced on the bed, and two coarsehands adjusted to her delicate waist the strap which hung from theceiling.For the last time, do you confess the facts in the case? demandedCharmolue, with his imperturbable benignity.I am innocent.Then, mademoiselle, how do you explain the circumstance laid to yourcharge?Alas, monseigneur, I do not know.So you deny them?All!Proceed, said Charmolue to Pierrat.Pierrat turned the handle of the screwjack, the boot was contracted,and the unhappy girl uttered one of those horrible cries which have noorthography in any human language.Stop! said Charmolue to Pierrat. Do you confess? he said to thegypsy.All! cried the wretched girl. I confess! I confess! Mercy!She had not calculated her strength when she faced the torture. Poorchild, whose life up to that time had been so joyous, so pleasant, sosweet, the first pain had conquered her!Humanity forces me to tell you, remarked the king procurator, thatin confessing, it is death that you must expect.I certainly hope so! said she. And she fell back upon the leather bed,dying, doubled up, allowing herself to hang suspended from the strapbuckled round her waist.Come, fair one, hold up a little, said Master Pierrat, raising her.You have the air of the lamb of the Golden Fleece which hangs fromMonsieur de Bourgogne neck.Jacques Charmolue raised his voice,Clerk, write. Young Bohemian maid, you confess your participation inthe feasts, witches’ sabbaths, and witchcrafts of hell, with ghosts,hags, and vampires? Answer.Yes, she said, so low that her words were lost in her breathing.You confess to having seen the ram which Beelzebub causes to appear inthe clouds to call together the witches’ sabbath, and which is beheld bysocerers alone?Yes.You confess to having adored the heads of Bophomet, those abominableidols of the Templars?Yes.To having had habitual dealings with the devil under the form of a goatfamiliar, joined with you in the suit?Yes.Lastly, you avow and confess to having, with the aid of the demon, andof the phantom vulgarly known as the surly monk, on the night of thetwentyninth of March last, murdered and assassinated a captain namedPhoebus de Châteaupers?She raised her large, staring eyes to the magistrate, and replied, asthough mechanically, without convulsion or agitation,Yes.It was evident that everything within her was broken.Write, clerk, said Charmolue. And, addressing the torturers, Releasethe prisoner, and take her back to the court.When the prisoner had been unbooted, the procurator of theecclesiastical court examined her foot, which was still swollen withpain. Come, said he, there no great harm done. You shrieked in goodseason. You could still dance, my beauty!Then he turned to his acolytes of the officiality,Behold justiceenlightened at last! This is a solace, gentlemen! Madamoiselle will bearus witness that we have acted with all possible gentleness.CHAPTER III. END OF THE CROWN WHICH WAS TURNED INTO A DRY LEAF.When she reentered the audience hall, pale and limping, she wasreceived with a general murmur of pleasure. On the part of the audiencethere was the feeling of impatience gratified which one experiences atthe theatre at the end of the last entr’acte of the comedy, when thecurtain rises and the conclusion is about to begin. On the part of thejudges, it was the hope of getting their suppers sooner.The little goat also bleated with joy. He tried to run towards hismistress, but they had tied him to the bench.Night was fully set in. The candles, whose number had not beenincreased, cast so little light, that the walls of the hall could not beseen. The shadows there enveloped all objects in a sort of mist. A fewapathetic faces of judges alone could be dimly discerned. Opposite them,at the extremity of the long hail, they could see a vaguely white pointstanding out against the sombre background. This was the accused.She had dragged herself to her place. When Charmolue had installedhimself in a magisterial manner in his own, he seated himself, thenrose and said, without exhibiting too much selfcomplacency at hissuccess,The accused has confessed all.Bohemian girl, the president continued, have you avowed allyour deeds of magic, prostitution, and assassination on Phoebus deChâteaupers.Her heart contracted. She was heard to sob amid the darkness.Anything you like, she replied feebly, but kill me quickly!Monsieur, procurator of the king in the ecclesiastical courts, saidthe president, the chamber is ready to hear you in your charge.Master Charmolue exhibited an alarming note book, and began to read,with many gestures and the exaggerated accentuation of the pleader, anoration in Latin, wherein all the proofs of the suit were piled upin Ciceronian periphrases, flanked with quotations from Plautus, hisfavorite comic author. We regret that we are not able to offer to ourreaders this remarkable piece. The orator pronounced it with marvellousaction. Before he had finished the exordium, the perspiration wasstarting from his brow, and his eyes from his bead.All at once, in the middle of a fine period, he interrupted himself, andhis glance, ordinarily so gentle and even stupid, became menacing.Gentlemen, he exclaimed (this time in French, for it was not inhis copy book), Satan is so mixed up in this affair, that here he ispresent at our debates, and making sport of their majesty. Behold!So saying, he pointed to the little goat, who, on seeing Charmoluegesticulating, had, in point of fact, thought it appropriate to do thesame, and had seated himself on his haunches, reproducing to the bestof his ability, with his forepaws and his bearded head the patheticpantomine of the king procurator in the ecclesiastical court. Thiswas, if the reader remembers, one of his prettiest accomplishments. Thisincident, this last proof, produced a great effect. The goathoofs were tied, and the king procurator resumed the thread of hiseloquence.It was very long, but the peroration was admirable. Here is theconcluding phrase; let the reader add the hoarse voice and thebreathless gestures of Master Charmolue,_Ideo, domni, coram stryga demonstrata, crimine patente, intentionecriminis existente, in nornine sanctoe ecclesioe NostroeDominceParisiensis quæ est in saisina habendi omnimodam altam et bassamjustitiam in illa hac intemerata Civitatis insula, tenore proesentiumdeclaremus nos requirere, primo, aliquamdam pecuniariam indemnitatem;secundo, amendationem honorabilem ante portalium maximumNostroeDominoe, ecclesioe cathedralis; tertio, sententiani in virtutecujus ista styrga cum sua capella, seu in trivio vulgariter dicto_ laGrève, _seu in insula exeunte in fluvio Secanoe, juxta pointam juardiniregalis, executatoe sint_!   The substance of this exordium is contained in the presidentsentence.He put on his cap again and seated himself.Eheu! sighed the brokenhearted Gringoire, _bassa latinitas_bastardlatin!Another man in a black gown rose near the accused; he was herlawyer.The judges, who were fasting, began to grumble.Advocate, be brief, said the president.Monsieur the President, replied the advocate, since the defendanthas confessed the crime, I have only one word to say to these gentlemen.Here is a text from the Salic law; If a witch hath eaten a man, and ifshe be convicted of it, she shall pay a fine of eight thousand deniers,which amount to two hundred sous of gold.’ May it please the chamber tocondemn my client to the fine?An abrogated text, said the advocate extraordinary of the king.Nego, I deny it, replied the advocate.Put it to the vote! said one of the councillors; the crime ismanifest, and it is late.They proceeded to take a vote without leaving the room. The judgessignified their assent without giving their reasons, they were in ahurry. Their capped heads were seen uncovering one after the other, inthe gloom, at the lugubrious question addressed to them by the presidentin a low voice. The poor accused had the appearance of looking at them,but her troubled eye no longer saw.Then the clerk began to write; then he handed a long parchment to thepresident.Then the unhappy girl heard the people moving, the pikes clashing, and afreezing voice saying to her,Bohemian wench, on the day when it shallseem good to our lord the king, at the hour of noon, you will be takenin a tumbrel, in your shift, with bare feet, and a rope about yourneck, before the grand portal of NotreDame, and you will there make anapology with a wax torch of the weight of two pounds in your hand, andthence you will be conducted to the Place de Grève, where you will behanged and strangled on the town gibbet; and likewise your goat; andyou will pay to the official three lions of gold, in reparation of thecrimes by you committed and by you confessed, of sorcery and magic,debauchery and murder, upon the person of the Sieur Phoebus deChâteaupers. May God have mercy on your soul!Oh! tis a dream! she murmured; and she felt rough hands bearing heraway.CHAPTER IV. _LASCIATE OGNI SPERANZA_LEAVE ALL HOPE BEHIND, YE WHOENTER HERE.In the Middle Ages, when an edifice was complete, there was almostas much of it in the earth as above it. Unless built upon piles, likeNotreDame, a palace, a fortress, a church, had always a double bottom.In cathedrals, it was, in some sort, another subterranean cathedral,low, dark, mysterious, blind, and mute, under the upper nave which wasoverflowing with light and reverberating with organs and bells day andnight. Sometimes it was a sepulchre. In palaces, in fortresses, it wasa prison, sometimes a sepulchre also, sometimes both together. Thesemighty buildings, whose mode of formation and vegetation we haveelsewhere explained, had not simply foundations, but, so to speak,roots which ran branching through the soil in chambers, galleries,and staircases, like the construction above. Thus churches, palaces,fortresses, had the earth half way up their bodies. The cellars of anedifice formed another edifice, into which one descended insteadof ascending, and which extended its subterranean grounds under theexternal piles of the monument, like those forests and mountains whichare reversed in the mirrorlike waters of a lake, beneath the forestsand mountains of the banks.At the fortress of SaintAntoine, at the Palais de Justice of Paris,at the Louvre, these subterranean edifices were prisons. The stories ofthese prisons, as they sank into the soil, grew constantly narrower andmore gloomy. They were so many zones, where the shades of horror weregraduated. Dante could never imagine anything better for his hell. Thesetunnels of cells usually terminated in a sack of a lowest dungeon, witha vatlike bottom, where Dante placed Satan, where society placed thosecondemned to death. A miserable human existence, once interred there;farewell light, air, life, _ogni speranza_every hope; it only cameforth to the scaffold or the stake. Sometimes it rotted there; humanjustice called this forgetting. Between men and himself, the condemnedman felt a pile of stones and jailers weighing down upon his head;and the entire prison, the massive bastille was nothing more than anenormous, complicated lock, which barred him off from the rest of theworld.It was in a sloping cavity of this description, in the _oubliettes_excavated by SaintLouis, in the _inpace_ of the Tournelle, that laEsmeralda had been placed on being condemned to death, through fear ofher escape, no doubt, with the colossal courthouse over her head. Poorfly, who could not have lifted even one of its blocks of stone!Assuredly, Providence and society had been equally unjust; such anexcess of unhappiness and of torture was not necessary to break so fraila creature.There she lay, lost in the shadows, buried, hidden, immured. Any onewho could have beheld her in this state, after having seen her laugh anddance in the sun, would have shuddered. Cold as night, cold as death,not a breath of air in her tresses, not a human sound in her ear,no longer a ray of light in her eyes; snapped in twain, crushed withchains, crouching beside a jug and a loaf, on a little straw, in apool of water, which was formed under her by the sweating of the prisonwalls; without motion, almost without breath, she had no longer thepower to suffer; Phoebus, the sun, midday, the open air, the streets ofParis, the dances with applause, the sweet babblings of love with theofficer; then the priest, the old crone, the poignard, the blood,the torture, the gibbet; all this did, indeed, pass before her mind,sometimes as a charming and golden vision, sometimes as a hideousnightmare; but it was no longer anything but a vague and horriblestruggle, lost in the gloom, or distant music played up above ground,and which was no longer audible at the depth where the unhappy girl hadfallen.Since she had been there, she had neither waked nor slept. In thatmisfortune, in that cell, she could no longer distinguish her wakinghours from slumber, dreams from reality, any more than day from night.All this was mixed, broken, floating, disseminated confusedly in herthought. She no longer felt, she no longer knew, she no longer thought;at the most, she only dreamed. Never had a living creature been thrustmore deeply into nothingness.Thus benumbed, frozen, petrified, she had barely noticed on two or threeoccasions, the sound of a trap door opening somewhere above her, withouteven permitting the passage of a little light, and through which a handhad tossed her a bit of black bread. Nevertheless, this periodicalvisit of the jailer was the sole communication which was left her withmankind.A single thing still mechanically occupied her ear; above her head, thedampness was filtering through the mouldy stones of the vault, anda drop of water dropped from them at regular intervals. She listenedstupidly to the noise made by this drop of water as it fell into thepool beside her.This drop of water falling from time to time into that pool, was theonly movement which still went on around her, the only clock whichmarked the time, the only noise which reached her of all the noise madeon the surface of the earth.To tell the whole, however, she also felt, from time to time, in thatcesspool of mire and darkness, something cold passing over her foot orher arm, and she shuddered.How long had she been there? She did not know. She had a recollectionof a sentence of death pronounced somewhere, against some one, thenof having been herself carried away, and of waking up in darkness andsilence, chilled to the heart. She had dragged herself along on herhands. Then iron rings that cut her ankles, and chains had rattled. Shehad recognized the fact that all around her was wall, that below herthere was a pavement covered with moisture and a truss of straw; butneither lamp nor airhole. Then she had seated herself on that strawand, sometimes, for the sake of changing her attitude, on the laststone step in her dungeon. For a while she had tried to count the blackminutes measured off for her by the drop of water; but that melancholylabor of an ailing brain had broken off of itself in her head, and hadleft her in stupor.At length, one day, or one night, (for midnight and midday were of thesame color in that sepulchre), she heard above her a louder noise thanwas usually made by the turnkey when he brought her bread and jug ofwater. She raised her head, and beheld a ray of reddish light passingthrough the crevices in the sort of trapdoor contrived in the roof ofthe _inpace_.At the same time, the heavy lock creaked, the trap grated on its rustyhinges, turned, and she beheld a lantern, a hand, and the lower portionsof the bodies of two men, the door being too low to admit of her seeingtheir heads. The light pained her so acutely that she shut her eyes.When she opened them again the door was closed, the lantern wasdeposited on one of the steps of the staircase; a man alone stood beforeher. A monk black cloak fell to his feet, a cowl of the same colorconcealed his face. Nothing was visible of his person, neither face norhands. It was a long, black shroud standing erect, and beneath whichsomething could be felt moving. She gazed fixedly for several minutesat this sort of spectre. But neither he nor she spoke. One would havepronounced them two statues confronting each other. Two things onlyseemed alive in that cavern; the wick of the lantern, which sputteredon account of the dampness of the atmosphere, and the drop of waterfrom the roof, which cut this irregular sputtering with its monotonoussplash, and made the light of the lantern quiver in concentric waves onthe oily water of the pool.At last the prisoner broke the silence.Who are you?A priest.The words, the accent, the sound of his voice made her tremble.The priest continued, in a hollow voice,Are you prepared?For what?To die.Oh! said she, will it be soon?Tomorrow.Her head, which had been raised with joy, fell back upon her breast.Tis very far away yet! she murmured; why could they not have done ittoday?Then you are very unhappy? asked the priest, after a silence.I am very cold, she replied.She took her feet in her hands, a gesture habitual with unhappy wretcheswho are cold, as we have already seen in the case of the recluse of theTourRoland, and her teeth chattered.The priest appeared to cast his eyes around the dungeon from beneath hiscowl.Without light! without fire! in the water! it is horrible!Yes, she replied, with the bewildered air which unhappiness had givenher. The day belongs to every one, why do they give me only night?Do you know, resumed the priest, after a fresh silence, why you arehere?I thought I knew once, she said, passing her thin fingers over hereyelids, as though to aid her memory, but I know no longer.All at once she began to weep like a child.I should like to get away from here, sir. I am cold, I am afraid, andthere are creatures which crawl over my body.Well, follow me.So saying, the priest took her arm. The unhappy girl was frozen to hervery soul. Yet that hand produced an impression of cold upon her.Oh! she murmured, tis the icy hand of death. Who are you?The priest threw back his cowl; she looked. It was the sinister visagewhich had so long pursued her; that demon head which had appeared atla Falourdel, above the head of her adored Phoebus; that eye which shelast had seen glittering beside a dagger.This apparition, always so fatal for her, and which had thus driven heron from misfortune to misfortune, even to torture, roused her from herstupor. It seemed to her that the sort of veil which had lain thick uponher memory was rent away. All the details of her melancholy adventure,from the nocturnal scene at la Falourdel to her condemnation to theTournelle, recurred to her memory, no longer vague and confused asheretofore, but distinct, harsh, clear, palpitating, terrible. Thesesouvenirs, half effaced and almost obliterated by excess of suffering,were revived by the sombre figure which stood before her, as theapproach of fire causes letters traced upon white paper with invisibleink, to start out perfectly fresh. It seemed to her that all the woundsof her heart opened and bled simultaneously.Hah! she cried, with her hands on her eyes, and a convulsivetrembling, tis the priest!Then she dropped her arms in discouragement, and remained seated, withlowered head, eyes fixed on the ground, mute and still trembling.The priest gazed at her with the eye of a hawk which has long beensoaring in a circle from the heights of heaven over a poor lark coweringin the wheat, and has long been silently contracting the formidablecircles of his flight, and has suddenly swooped down upon his prey likea flash of lightning, and holds it panting in his talons.She began to murmur in a low voice,Finish! finish! the last blow! and she drew her head down in terrorbetween her shoulders, like the lamb awaiting the blow of the butcheraxe.So I inspire you with horror? he said at length.She made no reply.Do I inspire you with horror? he repeated.Her lips contracted, as though with a smile.Yes, said she, the headsman scoffs at the condemned. Here he has beenpursuing me, threatening me, terrifying me for months! Had it not beenfor him, my God, how happy it should have been! It was he who cast meinto this abyss! Oh heavens! it was he who killed him! my Phoebus!Here, bursting into sobs, and raising her eyes to the priest,Oh! wretch, who are you? What have I done to you? Do you then, hate meso? Alas! what have you against me?I love thee! cried the priest.Her tears suddenly ceased, she gazed at him with the look of an idiot.He had fallen on his knees and was devouring her with eyes of flame.Dost thou understand? I love thee! he cried again.What love! said the unhappy girl with a shudder.He resumed,The love of a damned soul.Both remained silent for several minutes, crushed beneath the weight oftheir emotions; he maddened, she stupefied.Listen, said the priest at last, and a singular calm had come overhim; you shall know all I am about to tell you that which I havehitherto hardly dared to say to myself, when furtively interrogating myconscience at those deep hours of the night when it is so dark that itseems as though God no longer saw us. Listen. Before I knew you, younggirl, I was happy.So was I! she sighed feebly.Do not interrupt me. Yes, I was happy, at least I believed myself to beso. I was pure, my soul was filled with limpid light. No head was raisedmore proudly and more radiantly than mine. Priests consulted me onchastity; doctors, on doctrines. Yes, science was all in all to me; itwas a sister to me, and a sister sufficed. Not but that with age otherideas came to me. More than once my flesh had been moved as a womanform passed by. That force of sex and blood which, in the madness ofyouth, I had imagined that I had stifled forever had, more than once,convulsively raised the chain of iron vows which bind me, a miserablewretch, to the cold stones of the altar. But fasting, prayer, study,the mortifications of the cloister, rendered my soul mistress of my bodyonce more, and then I avoided women. Moreover, I had but to open a book,and all the impure mists of my brain vanished before the splendors ofscience. In a few moments, I felt the gross things of earth flee faraway, and I found myself once more calm, quieted, and serene, in thepresence of the tranquil radiance of eternal truth. As long as the demonsent to attack me only vague shadows of women who passed occasionallybefore my eyes in church, in the streets, in the fields, and who hardlyrecurred to my dreams, I easily vanquished him. Alas! if the victory hasnot remained with me, it is the fault of God, who has not created manand the demon of equal force. Listen. One dayHere the priest paused, and the prisoner heard sighs of anguish breakfrom his breast with a sound of the death rattle.He resumed,One day I was leaning on the window of my cell. What book was I readingthen? Oh! all that is a whirlwind in my head. I was reading. The windowopened upon a Square. I heard a sound of tambourine and music. Annoyedat being thus disturbed in my revery, I glanced into the Square. WhatI beheld, others saw beside myself, and yet it was not a spectacle madefor human eyes. There, in the middle of the pavement,it was midday,the sun was shining brightly,a creature was dancing. A creature sobeautiful that God would have preferred her to the Virgin and havechosen her for his mother and have wished to be born of her if shehad been in existence when he was made man! Her eyes were black andsplendid; in the midst of her black locks, some hairs through which thesun shone glistened like threads of gold. Her feet disappeared in theirmovements like the spokes of a rapidly turning wheel. Around her head,in her black tresses, there were disks of metal, which glittered in thesun, and formed a coronet of stars on her brow. Her dress thick set withspangles, blue, and dotted with a thousand sparks, gleamed like a summernight. Her brown, supple arms twined and untwined around her waist, liketwo scarfs. The form of her body was surprisingly beautiful. Oh! whata resplendent figure stood out, like something luminous even in thesunlight! Alas, young girl, it was thou! Surprised, intoxicated,charmed, I allowed myself to gaze upon thee. I looked so long that Isuddenly shuddered with terror; I felt that fate was seizing hold ofme.The priest paused for a moment, overcome with emotion. Then hecontinued,Already half fascinated, I tried to cling fast to something and holdmyself back from falling. I recalled the snares which Satan had alreadyset for me. The creature before my eyes possessed that superhuman beautywhich can come only from heaven or hell. It was no simple girl made witha little of our earth, and dimly lighted within by the vacillating rayof a woman soul. It was an angel! but of shadows and flame, and not oflight. At the moment when I was meditating thus, I beheld beside you agoat, a beast of witches, which smiled as it gazed at me. The midday sungave him golden horns. Then I perceived the snare of the demon, and I nolonger doubted that you had come from hell and that you had come thencefor my perdition. I believed it.Here the priest looked the prisoner full in the face, and added,coldly,I believe it still. Nevertheless, the charm operated little by little;your dancing whirled through my brain; I felt the mysterious spellworking within me. All that should have awakened was lulled to sleep;and like those who die in the snow, I felt pleasure in allowing thissleep to draw on. All at once, you began to sing. What could I do,unhappy wretch? Your song was still more charming than your dancing. Itried to flee. Impossible. I was nailed, rooted to the spot. It seemedto me that the marble of the pavement had risen to my knees. I wasforced to remain until the end. My feet were like ice, my head was onfire. At last you took pity on me, you ceased to sing, you disappeared.The reflection of the dazzling vision, the reverberation of theenchanting music disappeared by degrees from my eyes and my ears. Then Ifell back into the embrasure of the window, more rigid, more feeble thana statue torn from its base. The vesper bell roused me. I drew myselfup; I fled; but alas! something within me had fallen never to riseagain, something had come upon me from which I could not flee.He made another pause and went on,Yes, dating from that day, there was within me a man whom I did notknow. I tried to make use of all my remedies. The cloister, the altar,work, books,follies! Oh, how hollow does science sound when one indespair dashes against it a head full of passions! Do you know, younggirl, what I saw thenceforth between my book and me? You, your shade,the image of the luminous apparition which had one day crossed the spacebefore me. But this image had no longer the same color; it was sombre,funereal, gloomy as the black circle which long pursues the vision ofthe imprudent man who has gazed intently at the sun.Unable to rid myself of it, since I heard your song humming ever inmy head, beheld your feet dancing always on my breviary, felt even atnight, in my dreams, your form in contact with my own, I desired to seeyou again, to touch you, to know who you were, to see whether I shouldreally find you like the ideal image which I had retained of you, toshatter my dream, perchance, with reality. At all events, I hoped thata new impression would efface the first, and the first had becomeinsupportable. I sought you. I saw you once more. Calamity! When I hadseen you twice, I wanted to see you a thousand times, I wanted to seeyou always. Thenhow stop myself on that slope of hell?then I nolonger belonged to myself. The other end of the thread which the demonhad attached to my wings he had fastened to his foot. I became vagrantand wandering like yourself. I waited for you under porches, I stood onthe lookout for you at the street corners, I watched for you from thesummit of my tower. Every evening I returned to myself more charmed,more despairing, more bewitched, more lost!I had learned who you were; an Egyptian, Bohemian, gypsy, zingara. Howcould I doubt the magic? Listen. I hoped that a trial would free me fromthe charm. A witch enchanted Bruno d’Ast; he had her burned, and wascured. I knew it. I wanted to try the remedy. First I tried to have youforbidden the square in front of NotreDame, hoping to forget you if youreturned no more. You paid no heed to it. You returned. Then the idea ofabducting you occurred to me. One night I made the attempt. There weretwo of us. We already had you in our power, when that miserable officercame up. He delivered you. Thus did he begin your unhappiness, mine, andhis own. Finally, no longer knowing what to do, and what was to becomeof me, I denounced you to the official.I thought that I should be cured like Bruno d’Ast. I also had aconfused idea that a trial would deliver you into my hands; that, as aprisoner I should hold you, I should have you; that there you could notescape from me; that you had already possessed me a sufficiently longtime to give me the right to possess you in my turn. When one doeswrong, one must do it thoroughly. Tis madness to halt midway in themonstrous! The extreme of crime has its deliriums of joy. A priest and awitch can mingle in delight upon the truss of straw in a dungeon!Accordingly, I denounced you. It was then that I terrified you whenwe met. The plot which I was weaving against you, the storm which Iwas heaping up above your head, burst from me in threats and lightningglances. Still, I hesitated. My project had its terrible sides whichmade me shrink back.Perhaps I might have renounced it; perhaps my hideous thought wouldhave withered in my brain, without bearing fruit. I thought thatit would always depend upon me to follow up or discontinue thisprosecution. But every evil thought is inexorable, and insists onbecoming a deed; but where I believed myself to be all powerful, fatewas more powerful than I. Alas! tis fate which has seized you anddelivered you to the terrible wheels of the machine which I hadconstructed doubly. Listen. I am nearing the end.One day,again the sun was shining brilliantlyI behold man pass meuttering your name and laughing, who carries sensuality in his eyes.Damnation! I followed him; you know the rest.He ceased.The young girl could find but one word:Oh, my Phoebus!Not that name! said the priest, grasping her arm violently. Utter notthat name! Oh! miserable wretches that we are, tis that name which hasruined us! or, rather we have ruined each other by the inexplicable playof fate! you are suffering, are you not? you are cold; the night makesyou blind, the dungeon envelops you; but perhaps you still have somelight in the bottom of your soul, were it only your childish love forthat empty man who played with your heart, while I bear the dungeonwithin me; within me there is winter, ice, despair; I have night in mysoul.Do you know what I have suffered? I was present at your trial. I wasseated on the official bench. Yes, under one of the priests’ cowls,there were the contortions of the damned. When you were brought in, Iwas there; when you were questioned, I was there.Den of wolves!Itwas my crime, it was my gallows that I beheld being slowly reared overyour head. I was there for every witness, every proof, every plea; Icould count each of your steps in the painful path; I was still therewhen that ferocious beastoh! I had not foreseen torture! Listen.I followed you to that chamber of anguish. I beheld you stripped andhandled, half naked, by the infamous hands of the tormentor. I beheldyour foot, that foot which I would have given an empire to kiss and die,that foot, beneath which to have had my head crushed I should have feltsuch rapture,I beheld it encased in that horrible boot, which convertsthe limbs of a living being into one bloody clod. Oh, wretch! whileI looked on at that, I held beneath my shroud a dagger, with which Ilacerated my breast. When you uttered that cry, I plunged it into myflesh; at a second cry, it would have entered my heart. Look! I believethat it still bleeds.He opened his cassock. His breast was in fact, mangled as by the claw ofa tiger, and on his side he had a large and badly healed wound.The prisoner recoiled with horror.Oh! said the priest, young girl, have pity upon me! You thinkyourself unhappy; alas! alas! you know not what unhappiness is. Oh! tolove a woman! to be a priest! to be hated! to love with all the furyof one soul; to feel that one would give for the least of hersmiles, one blood, one vitals, one fame, one salvation, oneimmortality and eternity, this life and the other; to regret that oneis not a king, emperor, archangel, God, in order that one might placea greater slave beneath her feet; to clasp her night and day in onedreams and one thoughts, and to behold her in love with the trappingsof a soldier and to have nothing to offer her but a priest dirtycassock, which will inspire her with fear and disgust! To be presentwith one jealousy and one rage, while she lavishes on a miserable,blustering imbecile, treasures of love and beauty! To behold that bodywhose form burns you, that bosom which possesses so much sweetness, thatflesh palpitate and blush beneath the kisses of another! Oh heaven! tolove her foot, her arm, her shoulder, to think of her blue veins, of herbrown skin, until one writhes for whole nights together on the pavementof one cell, and to behold all those caresses which one has dreamedof, end in torture! To have succeeded only in stretching her upon theleather bed! Oh! these are the veritable pincers, reddened in the firesof hell. Oh! blessed is he who is sawn between two planks, or tornin pieces by four horses! Do you know what that torture is, which isimposed upon you for long nights by your burning arteries, your burstingheart, your breaking head, your teethknawed hands; mad tormentors whichturn you incessantly, as upon a redhot gridiron, to a thought of love,of jealousy, and of despair! Young girl, mercy! a truce for a moment!a few ashes on these live coals! Wipe away, I beseech you, theperspiration which trickles in great drops from my brow! Child! tortureme with one hand, but caress me with the other! Have pity, young girl!Have pity upon me!The priest writhed on the wet pavement, beating his head against thecorners of the stone steps. The young girl gazed at him, and listened tohim.When he ceased, exhausted and panting, she repeated in a low voice,Oh my Phoebus!The priest dragged himself towards her on his knees.I beseech you, he cried, if you have any heart, do not repulse me!Oh! I love you! I am a wretch! When you utter that name, unhappy girl,it is as though you crushed all the fibres of my heart between yourteeth. Mercy! If you come from hell I will go thither with you. I havedone everything to that end. The hell where you are, shall he paradise;the sight of you is more charming than that of God! Oh! speak! you willhave none of me? I should have thought the mountains would be shaken intheir foundations on the day when a woman would repulse such a love.Oh! if you only would! Oh! how happy we might be. We would fleeI wouldhelp you to flee,we would go somewhere, we would seek that spot onearth, where the sun is brightest, the sky the bluest, where the treesare most luxuriant. We would love each other, we would pour our twosouls into each other, and we would have a thirst for ourselves which wewould quench in common and incessantly at that fountain of inexhaustiblelove.She interrupted with a terrible and thrilling laugh.Look, father, you have blood on your fingers!The priest remained for several moments as though petrified, with hiseyes fixed upon his hand.Well, yes! he resumed at last, with strange gentleness, insult me,scoff at me, overwhelm me with scorn! but come, come. Let us make haste.It is to be tomorrow, I tell you. The gibbet on the Grève, you know it?it stands always ready. It is horrible! to see you ride in that tumbrel!Oh mercy! Until now I have never felt the power of my love for you.Oh!follow me. You shall take your time to love me after I have saved you.You shall hate me as long as you will. But come. Tomorrow! tomorrow!the gallows! your execution! Oh! save yourself! spare me!He seized her arm, he was beside himself, he tried to drag her away.She fixed her eye intently on him.What has become of my Phoebus?Ah! said the priest, releasing her arm, you are pitiless.What has become of Phoebus? she repeated coldly.He is dead! cried the priest.Dead! said she, still icy and motionless then why do you talk to meof living?He was not listening to her.Oh! yes, said he, as though speaking to himself, he certainly must bedead. The blade pierced deeply. I believe I touched his heart with thepoint. Oh! my very soul was at the end of the dagger!The young girl flung herself upon him like a raging tigress, and pushedhim upon the steps of the staircase with supernatural force.Begone, monster! Begone, assassin! Leave me to die! May the bloodof both of us make an eternal stain upon your brow! Be thine, priest!Never! never! Nothing shall unite us! not hell itself! Go, accursed man!Never!The priest had stumbled on the stairs. He silently disentangled hisfeet from the folds of his robe, picked up his lantern again, and slowlybegan the ascent of the steps which led to the door; he opened the doorand passed through it.All at once, the young girl beheld his head reappear; it wore afrightful expression, and he cried, hoarse with rage and despair,I tell you he is dead!She fell face downwards upon the floor, and there was no longer anysound audible in the cell than the sob of the drop of water which madethe pool palpitate amid the darkness.CHAPTER V. THE MOTHER.I do not believe that there is anything sweeter in the world than theideas which awake in a mother heart at the sight of her child tinyshoe; especially if it is a shoe for festivals, for Sunday, for baptism,the shoe embroidered to the very sole, a shoe in which the infant hasnot yet taken a step. That shoe has so much grace and daintiness, it isso impossible for it to walk, that it seems to the mother as though shesaw her child. She smiles upon it, she kisses it, she talks to it; sheasks herself whether there can actually be a foot so tiny; and if thechild be absent, the pretty shoe suffices to place the sweet and fragilecreature before her eyes. She thinks she sees it, she does see it,complete, living, joyous, with its delicate hands, its round head, itspure lips, its serene eyes whose white is blue. If it is in winter, itis yonder, crawling on the carpet, it is laboriously climbing upon anottoman, and the mother trembles lest it should approach the fire. If itis summer time, it crawls about the yard, in the garden, plucks up thegrass between the pavingstones, gazes innocently at the big dogs, thebig horses, without fear, plays with the shells, with the flowers, andmakes the gardener grumble because he finds sand in the flowerbeds andearth in the paths. Everything laughs, and shines and plays around it,like it, even the breath of air and the ray of sun which vie with eachother in disporting among the silky ringlets of its hair. The shoe showsall this to the mother, and makes her heart melt as fire melts wax.But when the child is lost, these thousand images of joy, of charms, oftenderness, which throng around the little shoe, become so manyhorrible things. The pretty broidered shoe is no longer anything but aninstrument of torture which eternally crushes the heart of the mother.It is always the same fibre which vibrates, the tenderest and mostsensitive; but instead of an angel caressing it, it is a demon who iswrenching at it.One May morning, when the sun was rising on one of those dark blue skiesagainst which Garofolo loves to place his Descents from the Cross, therecluse of the TourRoland heard a sound of wheels, of horses and ironsin the Place de Grève. She was somewhat aroused by it, knotted her hairupon her ears in order to deafen herself, and resumed her contemplation,on her knees, of the inanimate object which she had adored for fifteenyears. This little shoe was the universe to her, as we have alreadysaid. Her thought was shut up in it, and was destined never more to quitit except at death. The sombre cave of the TourRoland alone knew howmany bitter imprecations, touching complaints, prayers and sobs she hadwafted to heaven in connection with that charming bauble of rosecoloredsatin. Never was more despair bestowed upon a prettier and more gracefulthing.It seemed as though her grief were breaking forth more violently thanusual; and she could be heard outside lamenting in a loud and monotonousvoice which rent the heart.Oh my daughter! she said, my daughter, my poor, dear little child, soI shall never see thee more! It is over! It always seems to me that ithappened yesterday! My God! my God! it would have been better not togive her to me than to take her away so soon. Did you not know that ourchildren are part of ourselves, and that a mother who has lost her childno longer believes in God? Ah! wretch that I am to have gone out thatday! Lord! Lord! to have taken her from me thus; you could never havelooked at me with her, when I was joyously warming her at my fire, whenshe laughed as she suckled, when I made her tiny feet creep up my breastto my lips? Oh! if you had looked at that, my God, you would have takenpity on my joy; you would not have taken from me the only love whichlingered, in my heart! Was I then, Lord, so miserable a creature, thatyou could not look at me before condemning me?Alas! Alas! here isthe shoe; where is the foot? where is the rest? Where is the child? Mydaughter! my daughter! what did they do with thee? Lord, give her backto me. My knees have been worn for fifteen years in praying to thee,my God! Is not that enough? Give her back to me one day, one hour,one minute; one minute, Lord! and then cast me to the demon for alleternity! Oh! if I only knew where the skirt of your garment trails, Iwould cling to it with both hands, and you would be obliged to give meback my child! Have you no pity on her pretty little shoe? Could youcondemn a poor mother to this torture for fifteen years? Good Virgin!good Virgin of heaven! my infant Jesus has been taken from me, has beenstolen from me; they devoured her on a heath, they drank her blood, theycracked her bones! Good Virgin, have pity upon me. My daughter, I wantmy daughter! What is it to me that she is in paradise? I do not wantyour angel, I want my child! I am a lioness, I want my whelp. Oh! I willwrithe on the earth, I will break the stones with my forehead, and Iwill damn myself, and I will curse you, Lord, if you keep my child fromme! you see plainly that my arms are all bitten, Lord! Has the good Godno mercy?Oh! give me only salt and black bread, only let me have mydaughter to warm me like a sun! Alas! Lord my God. Alas! Lord my God,I am only a vile sinner; but my daughter made me pious. I was full ofreligion for the love of her, and I beheld you through her smile asthrough an opening into heaven. Oh! if I could only once, just oncemore, a single time, put this shoe on her pretty little pink foot, Iwould die blessing you, good Virgin. Ah! fifteen years! she will begrown up now!Unhappy child! what! it is really true then I shall neversee her more, not even in heaven, for I shall not go there myself. Oh!what misery to think that here is her shoe, and that that is all!The unhappy woman flung herself upon that shoe; her consolation and herdespair for so many years, and her vitals were rent with sobs as on thefirst day; because, for a mother who has lost her child, it is alwaysthe first day. That grief never grows old. The mourning garments maygrow white and threadbare, the heart remains dark.At that moment, the fresh and joyous cries of children passed in frontof the cell. Every time that children crossed her vision or struckher ear, the poor mother flung herself into the darkest corner of hersepulchre, and one would have said, that she sought to plunge her headinto the stone in order not to hear them. This time, on the contrary,she drew herself upright with a start, and listened eagerly. One of thelittle boys had just said,They are going to hang a gypsy today.With the abrupt leap of that spider which we have seen fling itself upona fly at the trembling of its web, she rushed to her airhole, whichopened as the reader knows, on the Place de Grève. A ladder had, infact, been raised up against the permanent gibbet, and the hangmanassistant was busying himself with adjusting the chains which had beenrusted by the rain. There were some people standing about.The laughing group of children was already far away. The sacked nunsought with her eyes some passerby whom she might question. All atonce, beside her cell, she perceived a priest making a pretext ofreading the public breviary, but who was much less occupied with thelectern of latticed iron, than with the gallows, toward which he casta fierce and gloomy glance from time to time. She recognized monsieurthe archdeacon of Josas, a holy man.Father, she inquired, whom are they about to hang yonder?The priest looked at her and made no reply; she repeated her question.Then he said,I know not.Some children said that it was a gypsy, went on the recluse.I believe so, said the priest.Then Paquette la Chantefleurie burst into hyenalike laughter.Sister, said the archdeacon, do you then hate the gypsies heartily?Do I hate them! exclaimed the recluse, they are vampires, stealersof children! They devoured my little daughter, my child, my only child!I have no longer any heart, they devoured it!She was frightful. The priest looked at her coldly.There is one in particular whom I hate, and whom I have cursed, sheresumed; it is a young one, of the age which my daughter would be ifher mother had not eaten my daughter. Every time that that young viperpasses in front of my cell, she sets my blood in a ferment.Well, sister, rejoice, said the priest, icy as a sepulchral statue;that is the one whom you are about to see die.His head fell upon his bosom and he moved slowly away.The recluse writhed her arms with joy.I predicted it for her, that she would ascend thither! Thanks, priest! she cried.And she began to pace up and down with long strides before the gratingof her window, her hair dishevelled, her eyes flashing, with hershoulder striking against the wall, with the wild air of a female wolfin a cage, who has long been famished, and who feels the hour for herrepast drawing near.CHAPTER VI. THREE HUMAN HEARTS DIFFERENTLY CONSTRUCTED.Phoebus was not dead, however. Men of that stamp die hard. When MasterPhilippe Lheulier, advocate extraordinary of the king, had said to poorEsmeralda; He is dying, it was an error or a jest. When the archdeaconhad repeated to the condemned girl; He is dead, the fact is that heknew nothing about it, but that he believed it, that he counted on it,that he did not doubt it, that he devoutly hoped it. It would have beentoo hard for him to give favorable news of his rival to the woman whomhe loved. Any man would have done the same in his place.It was not that Phoebus wound had not been serious, but it had notbeen as much so as the archdeacon believed. The physician, to whom thesoldiers of the watch had carried him at the first moment, had fearedfor his life during the space of a week, and had even told him so inLatin. But youth had gained the upper hand; and, as frequently happens,in spite of prognostications and diagnoses, nature had amused herself bysaving the sick man under the physician very nose. It was while hewas still lying on the leech pallet that he had submitted to theinterrogations of Philippe Lheulier and the official inquisitors,which had annoyed him greatly. Hence, one fine morning, feeling himselfbetter, he had left his golden spurs with the leech as payment, and hadslipped away. This had not, however, interfered with the progress of theaffair. Justice, at that epoch, troubled itself very little about theclearness and definiteness of a criminal suit. Provided that the accusedwas hung, that was all that was necessary. Now the judge had plenty ofproofs against la Esmeralda. They had supposed Phoebus to be dead, andthat was the end of the matter.Phoebus, on his side, had not fled far. He had simply rejoined hiscompany in garrison at QueueenBrie, in the IsledeFrance, a fewstages from Paris.After all, it did not please him in the least to appear in this suit.He had a vague feeling that he should play a ridiculous figure in it.On the whole, he did not know what to think of the whole affair.Superstitious, and not given to devoutness, like every soldier who isonly a soldier, when he came to question himself about this adventure,he did not feel assured as to the goat, as to the singular fashion inwhich he had met La Esmeralda, as to the no less strange manner in whichshe had allowed him to divine her love, as to her character as a gypsy,and lastly, as to the surly monk. He perceived in all these incidentsmuch more magic than love, probably a sorceress, perhaps the devil;a comedy, in short, or to speak in the language of that day, a verydisagreeable mystery, in which he played a very awkward part, the roleof blows and derision. The captain was quite put out of countenanceabout it; he experienced that sort of shame which our La Fontaine has soadmirably defined,    Ashamed as a fox who has been caught by a fowl.Moreover, he hoped that the affair would not get noised abroad, that hisname would hardly be pronounced in it, and that in any case it wouldnot go beyond the courts of the Tournelle. In this he was not mistaken,there was then no Gazette des Tribunaux; and as not a week passedwhich had not its counterfeiter to boil, or its witch to hang, or itsheretic to burn, at some one of the innumerable justices of Paris,people were so accustomed to seeing in all the squares the ancientfeudal Themis, bare armed, with sleeves stripped up, performing her dutyat the gibbets, the ladders, and the pillories, that they hardly paidany heed to it. Fashionable society of that day hardly knew the nameof the victim who passed by at the corner of the street, and it was thepopulace at the most who regaled themselves with this coarse fare. Anexecution was an habitual incident of the public highways, like thebraisingpan of the baker or the slaughterhouse of the knacker. Theexecutioner was only a sort of butcher of a little deeper dye than therest.Hence Phoebus mind was soon at ease on the score of the enchantressEsmeralda, or Similar, as he called her, concerning the blow from thedagger of the Bohemian or of the surly monk (it mattered little whichto him), and as to the issue of the trial. But as soon as his heart wasvacant in that direction, FleurdeLys returned to it. Captain Phoebusheart, like the physics of that day, abhorred a vacuum.QueueenBrie was a very insipid place to stay at then, a villageof farriers, and cowgirls with chapped hands, a long line of poordwellings and thatched cottages, which borders the grand road on bothsides for half a league; a tail (queue), in short, as its name imports.FleurdeLys was his last passion but one, a pretty girl, a charmingdowry; accordingly, one fine morning, quite cured, and assuming that,after the lapse of two months, the Bohemian affair must be completelyfinished and forgotten, the amorous cavalier arrived on a prancing horseat the door of the Gondelaurier mansion.He paid no attention to a tolerably numerous rabble which had assembledin the Place du Parvis, before the portal of NotreDame; he rememberedthat it was the month of May; he supposed that it was some procession,some Pentecost, some festival, hitched his horse to the ring at thedoor, and gayly ascended the stairs to his beautiful betrothed.She was alone with her mother.The scene of the witch, her goat, her cursed alphabet, and Phoebuslong absences, still weighed on FleurdeLys heart. Nevertheless, whenshe beheld her captain enter, she thought him so handsome, his doubletso new, his baldrick so shining, and his air so impassioned, that sheblushed with pleasure. The noble damsel herself was more charming thanever. Her magnificent blond hair was plaited in a ravishing manner, shewas dressed entirely in that sky blue which becomes fair people so well,a bit of coquetry which she had learned from Colombe, and her eyes wereswimming in that languor of love which becomes them still better.Phoebus, who had seen nothing in the line of beauty, since he left thevillage maids of QueueenBrie, was intoxicated with FleurdeLys, whichimparted to our officer so eager and gallant an air, that his peacewas immediately made. Madame de Gondelaurier herself, still maternallyseated in her big armchair, had not the heart to scold him. As forFleurdeLys reproaches, they expired in tender cooings.The young girl was seated near the window still embroidering her grottoof Neptune. The captain was leaning over the back of her chair, and shewas addressing her caressing reproaches to him in a low voice.What has become of you these two long months, wicked man?I swear to you, replied Phoebus, somewhat embarrassed by the question,that you are beautiful enough to set an archbishop to dreaming.She could not repress a smile.Good, good, sir. Let my beauty alone and answer my question. A finebeauty, in sooth!Well, my dear cousin, I was recalled to the garrison.And where is that, if you please? and why did not you come to sayfarewell?At QueueenBrie.Phoebus was delighted with the first question, which helped him to avoidthe second.But that is quite close by, monsieur. Why did you not come to see me asingle time?Here Phoebus was rather seriously embarrassed.Becausethe serviceand then, charming cousin, I have been ill.Ill! she repeated in alarm.Yes, wounded!Wounded!She poor child was completely upset.Oh! do not be frightened at that, said Phoebus, carelessly, it wasnothing. A quarrel, a sword cut; what is that to you?What is that to me? exclaimed FleurdeLys, raising her beautiful eyesfilled with tears. Oh! you do not say what you think when you speakthus. What sword cut was that? I wish to know all.Well, my dear fair one, I had a falling out with Mahè Fédy, you know?the lieutenant of SaintGermainenLaye, and we ripped open a few inchesof skin for each other. That is all.The mendacious captain was perfectly well aware that an affair ofhonor always makes a man stand well in the eyes of a woman. In fact,FleurdeLys looked him full in the face, all agitated with fear,pleasure, and admiration. Still, she was not completely reassured.Provided that you are wholly cured, my Phoebus! said she. I do notknow your Mahè Fédy, but he is a villanous man. And whence arose thisquarrel?Here Phoebus, whose imagination was endowed with but mediocre powerof creation, began to find himself in a quandary as to a means ofextricating himself for his prowess.Oh! how do I know?a mere nothing, a horse, a remark! Fair cousin, he exclaimed, for the sake of changing the conversation, what noise isthis in the Cathedral Square?He approached the window.Oh! _Mon Dieu_, fair cousin, how many people there are on the Place!I know not, said FleurdeLys; it appears that a witch is to dopenance this morning before the church, and thereafter to be hung.The captain was so thoroughly persuaded that la Esmeralda affair wasconcluded, that he was but little disturbed by FleurdeLys words.Still, he asked her one or two questions.What is the name of this witch?I do not know, she replied.And what is she said to have done?She shrugged her white shoulders.I know not.Oh, _mon Dieu_ Jesus! said her mother; there are so many witchesnowadays that I dare say they burn them without knowing their names. Onemight as well seek the name of every cloud in the sky. After all, onemay be tranquil. The good God keeps his register. Here the venerabledame rose and came to the window. Good Lord! you are right, Phoebus, said she. The rabble is indeed great. There are people on all theroofs, blessed be God! Do you know, Phoebus, this reminds me of my bestdays. The entrance of King Charles VII., when, also, there were manypeople. I no longer remember in what year that was. When I speak of thisto you, it produces upon you the effect,does it not?the effect ofsomething very old, and upon me of something very young. Oh! thecrowd was far finer than at the present day. They even stood upon themachicolations of the Porte SainteAntoine. The king had the queen on apillion, and after their highnesses came all the ladies mounted behindall the lords. I remember that they laughed loudly, because besideAmanyon de Garlande, who was very short of stature, there rode theSire Matefelon, a chevalier of gigantic size, who had killed heaps ofEnglish. It was very fine. A procession of all the gentlemen of France,with their oriflammes waving red before the eye. There were some withpennons and some with banners. How can I tell? the Sire de Calm with apennon; Jean de Châteaumorant with a banner; the Sire de Courcy with abanner, and a more ample one than any of the others except the Duc deBourbon. Alas! tis a sad thing to think that all that has existed andexists no longer!The two lovers were not listening to the venerable dowager. Phoebushad returned and was leaning on the back of his betrothed chair, acharming post whence his libertine glance plunged into all the openingsof FleurdeLys gorget. This gorget gaped so conveniently, and allowedhim to see so many exquisite things and to divine so many more, thatPhoebus, dazzled by this skin with its gleams of satin, said to himself,How can any one love anything but a fair skin?Both were silent. The young girl raised sweet, enraptured eyes to himfrom time to time, and their hair mingled in a ray of spring sunshine.Phoebus, said FleurdeLys suddenly, in a low voice, we are to bemarried three months hence; swear to me that you have never loved anyother woman than myself.I swear it, fair angel! replied Phoebus, and his passionate glancesaided the sincere tone of his voice in convincing FleurdeLys.Meanwhile, the good mother, charmed to see the betrothed pair on termsof such perfect understanding, had just quitted the apartment to attendto some domestic matter; Phoebus observed it, and this so emboldenedthe adventurous captain that very strange ideas mounted to his brain.FleurdeLys loved him, he was her betrothed; she was alone with him;his former taste for her had reawakened, not with all its freshnessbut with all its ardor; after all, there is no great harm in tastingone wheat while it is still in the blade; I do not know whetherthese ideas passed through his mind, but one thing is certain, thatFleurdeLys was suddenly alarmed by the expression of his glance. Shelooked round and saw that her mother was no longer there.Good heavens! said she, blushing and uneasy, how very warm I am?I think, in fact, replied Phoebus, that it cannot be far from midday.The sun is troublesome. We need only lower the curtains.No, no, exclaimed the poor little thing, on the contrary, I needair.And like a fawn who feels the breath of the pack of hounds, she rose,ran to the window, opened it, and rushed upon the balcony.Phoebus, much discomfited, followed her.The Place du Parvis NotreDame, upon which the balcony looked, as thereader knows, presented at that moment a singular and sinister spectaclewhich caused the fright of the timid FleurdeLys to change its nature.An immense crowd, which overflowed into all the neighboring streets,encumbered the Place, properly speaking. The little wall, breast high,which surrounded the Place, would not have sufficed to keep it freehad it not been lined with a thick hedge of sergeants and hackbuteers,culverines in hand. Thanks to this thicket of pikes and arquebuses, theParvis was empty. Its entrance was guarded by a force of halberdierswith the armorial bearings of the bishop. The large doors of the churchwere closed, and formed a contrast with the innumerable windows on thePlace, which, open to their very gables, allowed a view of thousands ofheads heaped up almost like the piles of bullets in a park of artillery.The surface of this rabble was dingy, dirty, earthy. The spectaclewhich it was expecting was evidently one of the sort which possess theprivilege of bringing out and calling together the vilest among thepopulace. Nothing is so hideous as the noise which was made by thatswarm of yellow caps and dirty heads. In that throng there were morelaughs than cries, more women than men.From time to time, a sharp and vibrating voice pierced the generalclamor.Ohé! Mahiet Baliffre! Is she to be hung yonder?Fool! t’is here that she is to make her apology in her shift! the goodGod is going to cough Latin in her face! That is always done here, atmidday. If tis the gallows that you wish, go to the Grève.I will go there, afterwards.Tell me, la Boucanbry? Is it true that she has refused a confessor?It appears so, La Bechaigne.You see what a pagan she is!Tis the custom, monsieur. The bailiff of the courts is bound todeliver the malefactor ready judged for execution if he be a layman, tothe provost of Paris; if a clerk, to the official of the bishopric.Thank you, sir.Oh, God! said FleurdeLys, the poor creature!This thought filled with sadness the glance which she cast upon thepopulace. The captain, much more occupied with her than with that packof the rabble, was amorously rumpling her girdle behind. She turnedround, entreating and smiling.Please let me alone, Phoebus! If my mother were to return, she wouldsee your hand!At that moment, midday rang slowly out from the clock of NotreDame. Amurmur of satisfaction broke out in the crowd. The last vibration of thetwelfth stroke had hardly died away when all heads surged like the wavesbeneath a squall, and an immense shout went up from the pavement, thewindows, and the roofs,There she is!FleurdeLys pressed her hands to her eyes, that she might not see.Charming girl, said Phoebus, do you wish to withdraw?No, she replied; and she opened through curiosity, the eyes which shehad closed through fear.A tumbrel drawn by a stout Norman horse, and all surrounded by cavalryin violet livery with white crosses, had just debouched upon the Placethrough the Rue SaintPierreauxBoeufs. The sergeants of the watch wereclearing a passage for it through the crowd, by stout blows from theirclubs. Beside the cart rode several officers of justice and police,recognizable by their black costume and their awkwardness in the saddle.Master Jacques Charmolue paraded at their head.In the fatal cart sat a young girl with her arms tied behind her back,and with no priest beside her. She was in her shift; her long black hair(the fashion then was to cut it off only at the foot of the gallows)fell in disorder upon her halfbared throat and shoulders.Athwart that waving hair, more glossy than the plumage of a raven, athick, rough, gray rope was visible, twisted and knotted, chafing herdelicate collarbones and twining round the charming neck of the poorgirl, like an earthworm round a flower. Beneath that rope glittered atiny amulet ornamented with bits of green glass, which had been left toher no doubt, because nothing is refused to those who are about to die.The spectators in the windows could see in the bottom of the cart hernaked legs which she strove to hide beneath her, as by a final feminineinstinct. At her feet lay a little goat, bound. The condemned girl heldtogether with her teeth her imperfectly fastened shift. One would havesaid that she suffered still more in her misery from being thus exposedalmost naked to the eyes of all. Alas! modesty is not made for suchshocks.Jesus! said FleurdeLys hastily to the captain. Look fair cousin,tis that wretched Bohemian with the goat.So saying, she turned to Phoebus. His eyes were fixed on the tumbrel. Hewas very pale.What Bohemian with the goat? he stammered.What! resumed FleurdeLys, do you not remember?Phoebus interrupted her.I do not know what you mean.He made a step to reenter the room, but FleurdeLys, whose jealousy,previously so vividly aroused by this same gypsy, had just beenreawakened, FleurdeLys gave him a look full of penetration anddistrust. She vaguely recalled at that moment having heard of a captainmixed up in the trial of that witch.What is the matter with you? she said to Phoebus, one would say, thatthis woman had disturbed you.Phoebus forced a sneer,Me! Not the least in the world! Ah! yes, certainly!Remain, then! she continued imperiously, and let us see the end.The unlucky captain was obliged to remain. He was somewhat reassured bythe fact that the condemned girl never removed her eyes from the bottomof the cart. It was but too surely la Esmeralda. In this last stage ofopprobrium and misfortune, she was still beautiful; her great black eyesappeared still larger, because of the emaciation of her cheeks; her paleprofile was pure and sublime. She resembled what she had been, inthe same degree that a virgin by Masaccio, resembles a virgin ofRaphael,weaker, thinner, more delicate.Moreover, there was nothing in her which was not shaken in some sort,and which with the exception of her modesty, she did not let go atwill, so profoundly had she been broken by stupor and despair. Her bodybounded at every jolt of the tumbrel like a dead or broken thing; hergaze was dull and imbecile. A tear was still visible in her eyes, butmotionless and frozen, so to speak.Meanwhile, the lugubrious cavalcade has traversed the crowd amid criesof joy and curious attitudes. But as a faithful historian, we must statethat on beholding her so beautiful, so depressed, many were moved withpity, even among the hardest of them.The tumbrel had entered the Parvis.It halted before the central portal. The escort ranged themselves inline on both sides. The crowd became silent, and, in the midst of thissilence full of anxiety and solemnity, the two leaves of the grand doorswung back, as of themselves, on their hinges, which gave a creak likethe sound of a fife. Then there became visible in all its length, thedeep, gloomy church, hung in black, sparely lighted with a few candlesgleaming afar off on the principal altar, opened in the midst of thePlace which was dazzling with light, like the mouth of a cavern. At thevery extremity, in the gloom of the apse, a gigantic silver crosswas visible against a black drapery which hung from the vault to thepavement. The whole nave was deserted. But a few heads of priests couldbe seen moving confusedly in the distant choir stalls, and, at themoment when the great door opened, there escaped from the church aloud, solemn, and monotonous chanting, which cast over the head of thecondemned girl, in gusts, fragments of melancholy psalms,_Non timebo millia populi circumdantis me: exsurge, Domine; salvum mefac, Deus_!_Salvum me fac, Deus, quoniam intraverunt aquæ usque ad animam meam_._Infixus sum in limo profundi; et non est substantia_.At the same time, another voice, separate from the choir, intoned uponthe steps of the chief altar, this melancholy offertory,_Qui verbummeum audit, et credit ei qui misit me, habet vitam oeternam et injudicium non venit; sed transit a morte im vitam_.   He that heareth my word and believeth on Him that sent me,hath eternal life, and hath not come into condemnation; but is passedfrom death to life.This chant, which a few old men buried in the gloom sang from afar overthat beautiful creature, full of youth and life, caressed by the warmair of spring, inundated with sunlight was the mass for the dead.The people listened devoutly.The unhappy girl seemed to lose her sight and her consciousness inthe obscure interior of the church. Her white lips moved as though inprayer, and the headsman assistant who approached to assist herto alight from the cart, heard her repeating this word in a lowtone,Phoebus.They untied her hands, made her alight, accompanied by her goat, whichhad also been unbound, and which bleated with joy at finding itselffree: and they made her walk barefoot on the hard pavement to the footof the steps leading to the door. The rope about her neck trailed behindher. One would have said it was a serpent following her.Then the chanting in the church ceased. A great golden cross and a rowof wax candles began to move through the gloom. The halberds of themotley beadles clanked; and, a few moments later, a long procession ofpriests in chasubles, and deacons in dalmatics, marched gravely towardsthe condemned girl, as they drawled their song, spread out before herview and that of the crowd. But her glance rested on the one who marchedat the head, immediately after the crossbearer.Oh! she said in a low voice, and with a shudder, tis he again! thepriest!It was in fact, the archdeacon. On his left he had the subchanter, onhis right, the chanter, armed with his official wand. He advanced withhead thrown back, his eyes fixed and wide open, intoning in a strongvoice,_De ventre inferi clamavi, et exaudisti vocem meam_._Et projecisti me in profundum in corde mans, et flumem circumdeditme_.    Out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardestmy voice. For thou hadst cast me into the deep in the midst of the seas,and the floods compassed me about.At the moment when he made his appearance in the full daylight beneaththe lofty arched portal, enveloped in an ample cope of silver barredwith a black cross, he was so pale that more than one person in thecrowd thought that one of the marble bishops who knelt on the sepulchralstones of the choir had risen and was come to receive upon the brink ofthe tomb, the woman who was about to die.She, no less pale, no less like a statue, had hardly noticed that theyhad placed in her hand a heavy, lighted candle of yellow wax; she hadnot heard the yelping voice of the clerk reading the fatal contentsof the apology; when they told her to respond with Amen, she respondedAmen. She only recovered life and force when she beheld the priest makea sign to her guards to withdraw, and himself advance alone towards her.Then she felt her blood boil in her head, and a remnant of indignationflashed up in that soul already benumbed and cold.The archdeacon approached her slowly; even in that extremity, she beheldhim cast an eye sparkling with sensuality, jealousy, and desire, overher exposed form. Then he said aloud,Young girl, have you asked God pardon for your faults andshortcomings?He bent down to her ear, and added (the spectators supposed that hewas receiving her last confession): Will you have me? I can still saveyou!She looked intently at him: Begone, demon, or I will denounce you!He gave vent to a horrible smile: You will not be believed. You willonly add a scandal to a crime. Reply quickly! Will you have me?What have you done with my Phoebus?He is dead! said the priest.At that moment the wretched archdeacon raised his head mechanically andbeheld at the other end of the Place, in the balcony of the Gondelauriermansion, the captain standing beside FleurdeLys. He staggered, passedhis hand across his eyes, looked again, muttered a curse, and all hisfeatures were violently contorted.Well, die then! he hissed between his teeth. No one shall haveyou. Then, raising his hand over the gypsy, he exclaimed in a funerealvoice:_I nunc, anima anceps, et sit tibi Deus misenicors_!    Go now, soul, trembling in the balance, and God have mercyupon thee.This was the dread formula with which it was the custom to concludethese gloomy ceremonies. It was the signal agreed upon between thepriest and the executioner.The crowd knelt._Kyrie eleison_, said the priests, who had remained beneath the archof the portal.    Lord have mercy upon us._Kyrie eleison_, repeated the throng in that murmur which runs overall heads, like the waves of a troubled sea.Amen, said the archdeacon.He turned his back on the condemned girl, his head sank upon his breastonce more, he crossed his hands and rejoined his escort of priests, anda moment later he was seen to disappear, with the cross, the candles,and the copes, beneath the misty arches of the cathedral, and hissonorous voice was extinguished by degrees in the choir, as he chantedthis verse of despair,_Omnes gurgites tui et fluctus tui super me transierunt_.    All thy waves and thy billows have gone over me.At the same time, the intermittent clash of the iron butts of thebeadles’ halberds, gradually dying away among the columns of the nave,produced the effect of a clock hammer striking the last hour of thecondemned.The doors of NotreDame remained open, allowing a view of the emptydesolate church, draped in mourning, without candles, and withoutvoices.The condemned girl remained motionless in her place, waiting to bedisposed of. One of the sergeants of police was obliged to notify MasterCharmolue of the fact, as the latter, during this entire scene, had beenengaged in studying the basrelief of the grand portal which represents,according to some, the sacrifice of Abraham; according to others, thephilosopher alchemical operation: the sun being figured forth by theangel; the fire, by the fagot; the artisan, by Abraham.There was considerable difficulty in drawing him away from thatcontemplation, but at length he turned round; and, at a signal which hegave, two men clad in yellow, the executioner assistants, approachedthe gypsy to bind her hands once more.The unhappy creature, at the moment of mounting once again the fatalcart, and proceeding to her last haltingplace, was seized, possibly,with some poignant clinging to life. She raised her dry, red eyes toheaven, to the sun, to the silvery clouds, cut here and there by a bluetrapezium or triangle; then she lowered them to objects around her, tothe earth, the throng, the houses; all at once, while the yellow man wasbinding her elbows, she uttered a terrible cry, a cry of joy. Yonder, onthat balcony, at the corner of the Place, she had just caught sight ofhim, of her friend, her lord, Phoebus, the other apparition of her life!The judge had lied! the priest had lied! it was certainly he, she couldnot doubt it; he was there, handsome, alive, dressed in his brilliantuniform, his plume on his head, his sword by his side!Phoebus! she cried, my Phoebus!And she tried to stretch towards him arms trembling with love andrapture, but they were bound.Then she saw the captain frown, a beautiful young girl who was leaningagainst him gazed at him with disdainful lips and irritated eyes; thenPhoebus uttered some words which did not reach her, and both disappearedprecipitately behind the window opening upon the balcony, which closedafter them.Phoebus! she cried wildly, can it be you believe it? A monstrousthought had just presented itself to her. She remembered that she hadbeen condemned to death for murder committed on the person of Phoebus deChâteaupers.She had borne up until that moment. But this last blow was too harsh.She fell lifeless on the pavement.Come, said Charmolue, carry her to the cart, and make an end of it.No one had yet observed in the gallery of the statues of the kings,carved directly above the arches of the portal, a strange spectator, whohad, up to that time, observed everything with such impassiveness, witha neck so strained, a visage so hideous that, in his motley accoutrementof red and violet, he might have been taken for one of those stonemonsters through whose mouths the long gutters of the cathedral havedischarged their waters for six hundred years. This spectator had missednothing that had taken place since midday in front of the portal ofNotreDame. And at the very beginning he had securely fastened to one ofthe small columns a large knotted rope, one end of which trailed on theflight of steps below. This being done, he began to look on tranquilly,whistling from time to time when a blackbird flitted past. Suddenly,at the moment when the superintendent assistants were preparingto execute Charmolue phlegmatic order, he threw his leg over thebalustrade of the gallery, seized the rope with his feet, his knees andhis hands; then he was seen to glide down the façade, as a drop ofrain slips down a windowpane, rush to the two executioners with theswiftness of a cat which has fallen from a roof, knock them down withtwo enormous fists, pick up the gypsy with one hand, as a child wouldher doll, and dash back into the church with a single bound, lifting theyoung girl above his head and crying in a formidable voice,Sanctuary!This was done with such rapidity, that had it taken place at night,the whole of it could have been seen in the space of a single flash oflightning.Sanctuary! Sanctuary! repeated the crowd; and the clapping of tenthousand hands made Quasimodo single eye sparkle with joy and pride.This shock restored the condemned girl to her senses. She raised hereyelids, looked at Quasimodo, then closed them again suddenly, as thoughterrified by her deliverer.Charmolue was stupefied, as well as the executioners and the entireescort. In fact, within the bounds of NotreDame, the condemned girlcould not be touched. The cathedral was a place of refuge. All temporaljurisdiction expired upon its threshold.Quasimodo had halted beneath the great portal, his huge feet seemedas solid on the pavement of the church as the heavy Roman pillars.His great, bushy head sat low between his shoulders, like the heads oflions, who also have a mane and no neck. He held the young girl, who wasquivering all over, suspended from his horny hands like a white drapery;but he carried her with as much care as though he feared to break heror blight her. One would have said that he felt that she was a delicate,exquisite, precious thing, made for other hands than his. There weremoments when he looked as if not daring to touch her, even with hisbreath. Then, all at once, he would press her forcibly in his arms,against his angular bosom, like his own possession, his treasure, asthe mother of that child would have done. His gnome eye, fastened uponher, inundated her with tenderness, sadness, and pity, and was suddenlyraised filled with lightnings. Then the women laughed and wept, thecrowd stamped with enthusiasm, for, at that moment Quasimodo had abeauty of his own. He was handsome; he, that orphan, that foundling,that outcast, he felt himself august and strong, he gazed in the faceof that society from which he was banished, and in which he had sopowerfully intervened, of that human justice from which he had wrenchedits prey, of all those tigers whose jaws were forced to remain empty, ofthose policemen, those judges, those executioners, of all that force ofthe king which he, the meanest of creatures, had just broken, with theforce of God.And then, it was touching to behold this protection which had fallenfrom a being so hideous upon a being so unhappy, a creature condemned todeath saved by Quasimodo. They were two extremes of natural and socialwretchedness, coming into contact and aiding each other.Meanwhile, after several moments of triumph, Quasimodo had plungedabruptly into the church with his burden. The populace, fond of allprowess, sought him with their eyes, beneath the gloomy nave, regrettingthat he had so speedily disappeared from their acclamations. All atonce, he was seen to reappear at one of the extremities of the galleryof the kings of France; he traversed it, running like a madman, raisinghis conquest high in his arms and shouting: Sanctuary! The crowd brokeforth into fresh applause. The gallery passed, he plunged once moreinto the interior of the church. A moment later, he reappeared upon theupper platform, with the gypsy still in his arms, still running madly,still crying, Sanctuary! and the throng applauded. Finally, he madehis appearance for the third time upon the summit of the tower wherehung the great bell; from that point he seemed to be showing to theentire city the girl whom he had saved, and his voice of thunder, thatvoice which was so rarely heard, and which he never heard himself,repeated thrice with frenzy, even to the clouds: Sanctuary! Sanctuary!Sanctuary!Noel! Noel! shouted the populace in its turn; and that immenseacclamation flew to astonish the crowd assembled at the Grève on theother bank, and the recluse who was still waiting with her eyes rivetedon the gibbet.BOOK NINTH.CHAPTER I. DELIRIUM.Claude Frollo was no longer in NotreDame when his adopted son soabruptly cut the fatal web in which the archdeacon and the gypsy wereentangled. On returning to the sacristy he had torn off his alb, cope,and stole, had flung all into the hands of the stupefied beadle, hadmade his escape through the private door of the cloister, had ordered aboatman of the Terrain to transport him to the left bank of the Seine,and had plunged into the hilly streets of the University, not knowingwhither he was going, encountering at every step groups of men and womenwho were hurrying joyously towards the Pont SaintMichel, in the hopeof still arriving in time to see the witch hung there,pale, wild, moretroubled, more blind and more fierce than a night bird let loose andpursued by a troop of children in broad daylight. He no longer knewwhere he was, what he thought, or whether he were dreaming. He wentforward, walking, running, taking any street at haphazard, making nochoice, only urged ever onward away from the Grève, the horrible Grève,which he felt confusedly, to be behind him.In this manner he skirted Mount SainteGeneviève, and finally emergedfrom the town by the Porte SaintVictor. He continued his flight as longas he could see, when he turned round, the turreted enclosure of theUniversity, and the rare houses of the suburb; but, when, at length, arise of ground had completely concealed from him that odious Paris, whenhe could believe himself to be a hundred leagues distant from it, in thefields, in the desert, he halted, and it seemed to him that he breathedmore freely.Then frightful ideas thronged his mind. Once more he could see clearlyinto his soul, and he shuddered. He thought of that unhappy girl who haddestroyed him, and whom he had destroyed. He cast a haggard eye over thedouble, tortuous way which fate had caused their two destinies to pursueup to their point of intersection, where it had dashed them against eachother without mercy. He meditated on the folly of eternal vows, onthe vanity of chastity, of science, of religion, of virtue, on theuselessness of God. He plunged to his heart content in evil thoughts,and in proportion as he sank deeper, he felt a Satanic laugh burst forthwithin him.And as he thus sifted his soul to the bottom, when he perceived howlarge a space nature had prepared there for the passions, he sneeredstill more bitterly. He stirred up in the depths of his heart all hishatred, all his malevolence; and, with the cold glance of a physicianwho examines a patient, he recognized the fact that this malevolencewas nothing but vitiated love; that love, that source of every virtue inman, turned to horrible things in the heart of a priest, and that a manconstituted like himself, in making himself a priest, made himself ademon. Then he laughed frightfully, and suddenly became pale again,when he considered the most sinister side of his fatal passion, of thatcorrosive, venomous malignant, implacable love, which had ended only inthe gibbet for one of them and in hell for the other; condemnation forher, damnation for him.And then his laughter came again, when he reflected that Phoebuswas alive; that after all, the captain lived, was gay and happy, hadhandsomer doublets than ever, and a new mistress whom he was conductingto see the old one hanged. His sneer redoubled its bitterness when hereflected that out of the living beings whose death he had desired, thegypsy, the only creature whom he did not hate, was the only one who hadnot escaped him.Then from the captain, his thought passed to the people, and there cameto him a jealousy of an unprecedented sort. He reflected that the peoplealso, the entire populace, had had before their eyes the woman whom heloved exposed almost naked. He writhed his arms with agony as he thoughtthat the woman whose form, caught by him alone in the darkness wouldhave been supreme happiness, had been delivered up in broad daylight atfull noonday, to a whole people, clad as for a night of voluptuousness.He wept with rage over all these mysteries of love, profaned, soiled,laid bare, withered forever. He wept with rage as he pictured to himselfhow many impure looks had been gratified at the sight of that badlyfastened shift, and that this beautiful girl, this virgin lily, this cupof modesty and delight, to which he would have dared to place his lipsonly trembling, had just been transformed into a sort of public bowl,whereat the vilest populace of Paris, thieves, beggars, lackeys, hadcome to quaff in common an audacious, impure, and depraved pleasure.And when he sought to picture to himself the happiness which he mighthave found upon earth, if she had not been a gypsy, and if he had notbeen a priest, if Phoebus had not existed and if she had loved him; whenhe pictured to himself that a life of serenity and love would have beenpossible to him also, even to him; that there were at that very moment,here and there upon the earth, happy couples spending the hours in sweetconverse beneath orange trees, on the banks of brooks, in the presenceof a setting sun, of a starry night; and that if God had so willed,he might have formed with her one of those blessed couples,his heartmelted in tenderness and despair.Oh! she! still she! It was this fixed idea which returned incessantly,which tortured him, which ate into his brain, and rent his vitals. Hedid not regret, he did not repent; all that he had done he was readyto do again; he preferred to behold her in the hands of the executionerrather than in the arms of the captain. But he suffered; he sufferedso that at intervals he tore out handfuls of his hair to see whether itwere not turning white.Among other moments there came one, when it occurred to him that it wasperhaps the very minute when the hideous chain which he had seenthat morning, was pressing its iron noose closer about that frail andgraceful neck. This thought caused the perspiration to start from everypore.There was another moment when, while laughing diabolically at himself,he represented to himself la Esmeralda as he had seen her on thatfirst day, lively, careless, joyous, gayly attired, dancing, winged,harmonious, and la Esmeralda of the last day, in her scanty shift, witha rope about her neck, mounting slowly with her bare feet, the angularladder of the gallows; he figured to himself this double picture in sucha manner that he gave vent to a terrible cry.While this hurricane of despair overturned, broke, tore up, bent,uprooted everything in his soul, he gazed at nature around him. At hisfeet, some chickens were searching the thickets and pecking, enamelledbeetles ran about in the sun; overhead, some groups of dappled grayclouds were floating across the blue sky; on the horizon, the spireof the Abbey SaintVictor pierced the ridge of the hill with its slateobelisk; and the miller of the Copeaue hillock was whistling as hewatched the laborious wings of his mill turning. All this active,organized, tranquil life, recurring around him under a thousand forms,hurt him. He resumed his flight.He sped thus across the fields until evening. This flight from nature,life, himself, man, God, everything, lasted all day long. Sometimes heflung himself face downward on the earth, and tore up the young bladesof wheat with his nails. Sometimes he halted in the deserted street ofa village, and his thoughts were so intolerable that he grasped his headin both hands and tried to tear it from his shoulders in order to dashit upon the pavement.Towards the hour of sunset, he examined himself again, and found himselfnearly mad. The tempest which had raged within him ever since theinstant when he had lost the hope and the will to save the gypsy,thattempest had not left in his conscience a single healthy idea, a singlethought which maintained its upright position. His reason lay therealmost entirely destroyed. There remained but two distinct images in hismind, la Esmeralda and the gallows; all the rest was blank. Those twoimages united, presented to him a frightful group; and the more heconcentrated what attention and thought was left to him, the more hebeheld them grow, in accordance with a fantastic progression, the one ingrace, in charm, in beauty, in light, the other in deformity and horror;so that at last la Esmeralda appeared to him like a star, the gibbetlike an enormous, fleshless arm.One remarkable fact is, that during the whole of this torture, the ideaof dying did not seriously occur to him. The wretch was made so. Heclung to life. Perhaps he really saw hell beyond it.Meanwhile, the day continued to decline. The living being which stillexisted in him reflected vaguely on retracing its steps. He believedhimself to be far away from Paris; on taking his bearings, he perceivedthat he had only circled the enclosure of the University. The spire ofSaintSulpice, and the three lofty needles of Saint GermaindesPrés,rose above the horizon on his right. He turned his steps in thatdirection. When he heard the brisk challenge of the menatarms of theabbey, around the crenelated, circumscribing wall of SaintGermain, heturned aside, took a path which presented itself between the abbey andthe lazarhouse of the bourg, and at the expiration of a few minutesfound himself on the verge of the PréauxClercs. This meadow wascelebrated by reason of the brawls which went on there night and day;it was the hydra of the poor monks of SaintGermain: _quod mouachisSanctiGermaini pratensis hydra fuit, clericis nova semper dissidiorumcapita suscitantibus_. The archdeacon was afraid of meeting some onethere; he feared every human countenance; he had just avoided theUniversity and the Bourg SaintGermain; he wished to reenter thestreets as late as possible. He skirted the PréauxClercs, took thedeserted path which separated it from the DieuNeuf, and at last reachedthe water edge. There Dom Claude found a boatman, who, for a fewfarthings in Parisian coinage, rowed him up the Seine as far as thepoint of the city, and landed him on that tongue of abandoned landwhere the reader has already beheld Gringoire dreaming, and whichwas prolonged beyond the king gardens, parallel to the Ile duPasseurauxVaches.The monotonous rocking of the boat and the ripple of the water had, insome sort, quieted the unhappy Claude. When the boatman had taken hisdeparture, he remained standing stupidly on the strand, staring straightbefore him and perceiving objects only through magnifying oscillationswhich rendered everything a sort of phantasmagoria to him. The fatigueof a great grief not infrequently produces this effect on the mind.The sun had set behind the lofty TourdeNesle. It was the twilighthour. The sky was white, the water of the river was white. Between thesetwo white expanses, the left bank of the Seine, on which his eyes werefixed, projected its gloomy mass and, rendered ever thinner and thinnerby perspective, it plunged into the gloom of the horizon like a blackspire. It was loaded with houses, of which only the obscure outlinecould be distinguished, sharply brought out in shadows against the lightbackground of the sky and the water. Here and there windows began togleam, like the holes in a brazier. That immense black obelisk thusisolated between the two white expanses of the sky and the river,which was very broad at this point, produced upon Dom Claude a singulareffect, comparable to that which would be experienced by a man who,reclining on his back at the foot of the tower of Strasburg, should gazeat the enormous spire plunging into the shadows of the twilight abovehis head. Only, in this case, it was Claude who was erect and theobelisk which was lying down; but, as the river, reflecting the sky,prolonged the abyss below him, the immense promontory seemed to be asboldly launched into space as any cathedral spire; and the impressionwas the same. This impression had even one stronger and more profoundpoint about it, that it was indeed the tower of Strasbourg, but thetower of Strasbourg two leagues in height; something unheard of,gigantic, immeasurable; an edifice such as no human eye has ever seen;a tower of Babel. The chimneys of the houses, the battlements of thewalls, the faceted gables of the roofs, the spire of the Augustines,the tower of Nesle, all these projections which broke the profile ofthe colossal obelisk added to the illusion by displaying in eccentricfashion to the eye the indentations of a luxuriant and fantasticsculpture.Claude, in the state of hallucination in which he found himself,believed that he saw, that he saw with his actual eyes, the bell towerof hell; the thousand lights scattered over the whole height of theterrible tower seemed to him so many porches of the immense interiorfurnace; the voices and noises which escaped from it seemed so manyshrieks, so many death groans. Then he became alarmed, he put his handson his ears that he might no longer hear, turned his back that he mightno longer see, and fled from the frightful vision with hasty strides.But the vision was in himself.When he reentered the streets, the passersby elbowing each other bythe light of the shopfronts, produced upon him the effect of a constantgoing and coming of spectres about him. There were strange noises in hisears; extraordinary fancies disturbed his brain. He saw neitherhouses, nor pavements, nor chariots, nor men and women, but a chaos ofindeterminate objects whose edges melted into each other. At the cornerof the Rue de la Barillerie, there was a grocer shop whose porch wasgarnished all about, according to immemorial custom, with hoops of tinfrom which hung a circle of wooden candles, which came in contact witheach other in the wind, and rattled like castanets. He thought he hearda cluster of skeletons at Montfauçon clashing together in the gloom.Oh! he muttered, the night breeze dashes them against each other,and mingles the noise of their chains with the rattle of their bones!Perhaps she is there among them!In his state of frenzy, he knew not whither he was going. After a fewstrides he found himself on the Pont SaintMichel. There was a lightin the window of a groundfloor room; he approached. Through a crackedwindow he beheld a mean chamber which recalled some confused memoryto his mind. In that room, badly lighted by a meagre lamp, there was afresh, lighthaired young man, with a merry face, who amid loud burstsof laughter was embracing a very audaciously attired young girl; andnear the lamp sat an old crone spinning and singing in a quaveringvoice. As the young man did not laugh constantly, fragments of the oldwoman ditty reached the priest; it was something unintelligible yetfrightful,     _Grève, aboie, Grève, grouille!     File, file, ma quenouille,     File sa corde au bourreau,     Qui siffle dans le pre au,     Grève, aboie, Grève, grouille_!    _La belle corde de chanvre!    Semez d’Issy jusqu’á Vanvre    Du chanvre et non pas du bleu.    Le voleur n’a pas vole    La belle corde de chanvre_.    _Grève, grouille, Grève, aboie!    Pour voir la fille de joie,    Prendre au gibet chassieux,    Les fenêtres sont des yeux.    Grève, grouille, Grève, aboie!_    Bark, Grève, grumble, Grève! Spin, spin, my distaff, spinher rope for the hangman, who is whistling in the meadow. What abeautiful hempen rope! Sow hemp, not wheat, from Issy to Vanvre. Thethief hath not stolen the beautiful hempen rope. Grumble, Grève, bark,Grève! To see the dissolute wench hang on the bleareyed gibbet, windowsare eyes.Thereupon the young man laughed and caressed the wench. The crone wasla Falourdel; the girl was a courtesan; the young man was his brotherJehan.He continued to gaze. That spectacle was as good as any other.He saw Jehan go to a window at the end of the room, open it, cast aglance on the quay, where in the distance blazed a thousand lightedcasements, and he heard him say as he closed the sash,Pon my soul! How dark it is; the people are lighting their candles,and the good God his stars.Then Jehan came back to the hag, smashed a bottle standing on the table,exclaiming,Already empty, _corboeuf_! and I have no more money! Isabeau, my dear,I shall not be satisfied with Jupiter until he has changed your twowhite nipples into two black bottles, where I may suck wine of Beauneday and night.This fine pleasantry made the courtesan laugh, and Jehan left the room.Dom Claude had barely time to fling himself on the ground in order thathe might not be met, stared in the face and recognized by his brother.Luckily, the street was dark, and the scholar was tipsy. Nevertheless,he caught sight of the archdeacon prone upon the earth in the mud.Oh! oh! said he; here a fellow who has been leading a jolly life,today.He stirred up Dom Claude with his foot, and the latter held his breath.Dead drunk, resumed Jehan. Come, he full. A regular leech detachedfrom a hogshead. He bald, he added, bending down, tis an old man!_Fortunate senex_!Then Dom Claude heard him retreat, saying,Tis all the same, reason is a fine thing, and my brother thearchdeacon is very happy in that he is wise and has money.Then the archdeacon rose to his feet, and ran without halting, towardsNotreDame, whose enormous towers he beheld rising above the housesthrough the gloom.At the instant when he arrived, panting, on the Place du Parvis, heshrank back and dared not raise his eyes to the fatal edifice.Oh! he said, in a low voice, is it really true that such a thing tookplace here, today, this very morning?Still, he ventured to glance at the church. The front was sombre; thesky behind was glittering with stars. The crescent of the moon, in herflight upward from the horizon, had paused at the moment, on the summitof the light hand tower, and seemed to have perched itself, like aluminous bird, on the edge of the balustrade, cut out in black trefoils.The cloister door was shut; but the archdeacon always carried with himthe key of the tower in which his laboratory was situated. He made useof it to enter the church.In the church he found the gloom and silence of a cavern. By the deepshadows which fell in broad sheets from all directions, he recognizedthe fact that the hangings for the ceremony of the morning had not yetbeen removed. The great silver cross shone from the depths of thegloom, powdered with some sparkling points, like the milky way ofthat sepulchral night. The long windows of the choir showed the upperextremities of their arches above the black draperies, and their paintedpanes, traversed by a ray of moonlight had no longer any hues but thedoubtful colors of night, a sort of violet, white and blue, whose tintis found only on the faces of the dead. The archdeacon, on perceivingthese wan spots all around the choir, thought he beheld the mitres ofdamned bishops. He shut his eyes, and when he opened them again, hethought they were a circle of pale visages gazing at him.He started to flee across the church. Then it seemed to him that thechurch also was shaking, moving, becoming endued with animation, that itwas alive; that each of the great columns was turning into an enormouspaw, which was beating the earth with its big stone spatula, and thatthe gigantic cathedral was no longer anything but a sort of prodigiouselephant, which was breathing and marching with its pillars for feet,its two towers for trunks and the immense black cloth for its housings.This fever or madness had reached such a degree of intensity that theexternal world was no longer anything more for the unhappy man than asort of Apocalypse,visible, palpable, terrible.For one moment, he was relieved. As he plunged into the side aisles, heperceived a reddish light behind a cluster of pillars. He ran towards itas to a star. It was the poor lamp which lighted the public breviaryof NotreDame night and day, beneath its iron grating. He flung himselfeagerly upon the holy book in the hope of finding some consolation, orsome encouragement there. The hook lay open at this passage of Job, overwhich his staring eye glanced,And a spirit passed before my face, and I heard a small voice, and thehair of my flesh stood up.On reading these gloomy words, he felt that which a blind man feels whenhe feels himself pricked by the staff which he has picked up. His kneesgave way beneath him, and he sank upon the pavement, thinking of her whohad died that day. He felt so many monstrous vapors pass and dischargethemselves in his brain, that it seemed to him that his head had becomeone of the chimneys of hell.It would appear that he remained a long time in this attitude, no longerthinking, overwhelmed and passive beneath the hand of the demon. Atlength some strength returned to him; it occurred to him to take refugein his tower beside his faithful Quasimodo. He rose; and, as he wasafraid, he took the lamp from the breviary to light his way. It was asacrilege; but he had got beyond heeding such a trifle now.He slowly climbed the stairs of the towers, filled with a secret frightwhich must have been communicated to the rare passersby in the Placedu Parvis by the mysterious light of his lamp, mounting so late fromloophole to loophole of the bell tower.All at once, he felt a freshness on his face, and found himself at thedoor of the highest gallery. The air was cold; the sky was filled withhurrying clouds, whose large, white flakes drifted one upon another likethe breaking up of river ice after the winter. The crescent of the moon,stranded in the midst of the clouds, seemed a celestial vessel caught inthe icecakes of the air.He lowered his gaze, and contemplated for a moment, through the railingof slender columns which unites the two towers, far away, through agauze of mists and smoke, the silent throng of the roofs of Paris,pointed, innumerable, crowded and small like the waves of a tranquil seaon a summer night.The moon cast a feeble ray, which imparted to earth and heaven an ashyhue.At that moment the clock raised its shrill, cracked voice. Midnight rangout. The priest thought of midday; twelve o’clock had come back again.Oh! he said in a very low tone, she must be cold now.All at once, a gust of wind extinguished his lamp, and almost at thesame instant, he beheld a shade, a whiteness, a form, a woman, appearfrom the opposite angle of the tower. He started. Beside this woman wasa little goat, which mingled its bleat with the last bleat of the clock.He had strength enough to look. It was she.She was pale, she was gloomy. Her hair fell over her shoulders as in themorning; but there was no longer a rope on her neck, her hands were nolonger bound; she was free, she was dead.She was dressed in white and had a white veil on her head.She came towards him, slowly, with her gaze fixed on the sky. Thesupernatural goat followed her. He felt as though made of stone andtoo heavy to flee. At every step which she took in advance, he took onebackwards, and that was all. In this way he retreated once more beneaththe gloomy arch of the stairway. He was chilled by the thought that shemight enter there also; had she done so, he would have died of terror.She did arrive, in fact, in front of the door to the stairway, andpaused there for several minutes, stared intently into the darkness, butwithout appearing to see the priest, and passed on. She seemed tallerto him than when she had been alive; he saw the moon through her whiterobe; he heard her breath.When she had passed on, he began to descend the staircase again, withthe slowness which he had observed in the spectre, believing himself tobe a spectre too, haggard, with hair on end, his extinguished lamp stillin his hand; and as he descended the spiral steps, he distinctly heardin his ear a voice laughing and repeating,A spirit passed before my face, and I heard a small voice, and the hairof my flesh stood up.CHAPTER II. HUNCHBACKED, ONE EYED, LAME.Every city during the Middle Ages, and every city in France down to thetime of Louis XII. had its places of asylum. These sanctuaries, in themidst of the deluge of penal and barbarous jurisdictions which inundatedthe city, were a species of islands which rose above the level of humanjustice. Every criminal who landed there was safe. There were in everysuburb almost as many places of asylum as gallows. It was the abuse ofimpunity by the side of the abuse of punishment; two bad things whichstrove to correct each other. The palaces of the king, the hotels ofthe princes, and especially churches, possessed the right of asylum.Sometimes a whole city which stood in need of being repeopled wastemporarily created a place of refuge. Louis XI. made all Paris a refugein 1467.His foot once within the asylum, the criminal was sacred; but he mustbeware of leaving it; one step outside the sanctuary, and he fell backinto the flood. The wheel, the gibbet, the strappado, kept good guardaround the place of refuge, and lay in watch incessantly for their prey,like sharks around a vessel. Hence, condemned men were to be seen whosehair had grown white in a cloister, on the steps of a palace, in theenclosure of an abbey, beneath the porch of a church; in this manner theasylum was a prison as much as any other. It sometimes happened thata solemn decree of parliament violated the asylum and restored thecondemned man to the executioner; but this was of rare occurrence.Parliaments were afraid of the bishops, and when there was frictionbetween these two robes, the gown had but a poor chance against thecassock. Sometimes, however, as in the affair of the assassins ofPetitJean, the headsman of Paris, and in that of Emery Rousseau, themurderer of Jean Valleret, justice overleaped the church and passed onto the execution of its sentences; but unless by virtue of a decree ofParliament, woe to him who violated a place of asylum with armed force!The reader knows the manner of death of Robert de Clermont, Marshalof France, and of Jean de Châlons, Marshal of Champagne; and yetthe question was only of a certain Perrin Marc, the clerk of amoneychanger, a miserable assassin; but the two marshals had broken thedoors of St. Méry. Therein lay the enormity.Such respect was cherished for places of refuge that, according totradition, animals even felt it at times. Aymoire relates that astag, being chased by Dagobert, having taken refuge near the tomb ofSaintDenis, the pack of hounds stopped short and barked.Churches generally had a small apartment prepared for the reception ofsupplicants. In 1407, Nicolas Flamel caused to be built on the vaults ofSaintJacques de la Boucherie, a chamber which cost him four livres sixsous, sixteen farthings, parisis.At NotreDame it was a tiny cell situated on the roof of the side aisle,beneath the flying buttresses, precisely at the spot where the wife ofthe present janitor of the towers has made for herself a garden, whichis to the hanging gardens of Babylon what a lettuce is to a palmtree,what a porter wife is to a Semiramis.It was here that Quasimodo had deposited la Esmeralda, after his wildand triumphant course. As long as that course lasted, the young girlhad been unable to recover her senses, half unconscious, half awake, nolonger feeling anything, except that she was mounting through the air,floating in it, flying in it, that something was raising her above theearth. From time to time she heard the loud laughter, the noisy voiceof Quasimodo in her ear; she half opened her eyes; then below her sheconfusedly beheld Paris checkered with its thousand roofs of slate andtiles, like a red and blue mosaic, above her head the frightful andjoyous face of Quasimodo. Then her eyelids drooped again; she thoughtthat all was over, that they had executed her during her swoon, and thatthe misshapen spirit which had presided over her destiny, had laid holdof her and was bearing her away. She dared not look at him, and shesurrendered herself to her fate. But when the bellringer, dishevelledand panting, had deposited her in the cell of refuge, when she felt hishuge hands gently detaching the cord which bruised her arms, she feltthat sort of shock which awakens with a start the passengers of a vesselwhich runs aground in the middle of a dark night. Her thoughtsawoke also, and returned to her one by one. She saw that she was inNotreDame; she remembered having been torn from the hands of theexecutioner; that Phoebus was alive, that Phoebus loved her no longer;and as these two ideas, one of which shed so much bitterness over theother, presented themselves simultaneously to the poor condemned girl;she turned to Quasimodo, who was standing in front of her, and whoterrified her; she said to him,Why have you saved me?He gazed at her with anxiety, as though seeking to divine what she wassaying to him. She repeated her question. Then he gave her a profoundlysorrowful glance and fled. She was astonished.A few moments later he returned, bearing a package which he cast ather feet. It was clothing which some charitable women had left on thethreshold of the church for her.Then she dropped her eyes upon herself and saw that she was almostnaked, and blushed. Life had returned.Quasimodo appeared to experience something of this modesty. He coveredhis eyes with his large hand and retired once more, but slowly.She made haste to dress herself. The robe was a white one with a whiteveil,the garb of a novice of the HôtelDien.She had barely finished when she beheld Quasimodo returning. He carrieda basket under one arm and a mattress under the other. In the basketthere was a bottle, bread, and some provisions. He set the basket on thefloor and said, Eat! He spread the mattress on the flagging and said,Sleep.It was his own repast, it was his own bed, which the bellringer had gonein search of.The gypsy raised her eyes to thank him, but she could not articulate aword. She dropped her head with a quiver of terror.Then he said to her.I frighten you. I am very ugly, am I not? Do not look at me; onlylisten to me. During the day you will remain here; at night you can walkall over the church. But do not leave the church either by day or bynight. You would be lost. They would kill you, and I should die.She was touched and raised her head to answer him. He had disappeared.She found herself alone once more, meditating upon the singular words ofthis almost monstrous being, and struck by the sound of his voice, whichwas so hoarse yet so gentle.Then she examined her cell. It was a chamber about six feet square,with a small window and a door on the slightly sloping plane of the roofformed of flat stones. Many gutters with the figures of animals seemedto be bending down around her, and stretching their necks in order tostare at her through the window. Over the edge of her roof she perceivedthe tops of thousands of chimneys which caused the smoke of all thefires in Paris to rise beneath her eyes. A sad sight for the poor gypsy,a foundling, condemned to death, an unhappy creature, without country,without family, without a hearthstone.At the moment when the thought of her isolation thus appeared to hermore poignant than ever, she felt a bearded and hairy head glide betweenher hands, upon her knees. She started (everything alarmed her now) andlooked. It was the poor goat, the agile Djali, which had made its escapeafter her, at the moment when Quasimodo had put to flight Charmoluebrigade, and which had been lavishing caresses on her feet for nearlyan hour past, without being able to win a glance. The gypsy covered himwith kisses.Oh! Djali! she said, how I have forgotten thee! And so thou stillthinkest of me! Oh! thou art not an ingrate!At the same time, as though an invisible hand had lifted the weightwhich had repressed her tears in her heart for so long, she began toweep, and, in proportion as her tears flowed, she felt all that was mostacrid and bitter in her grief depart with them.Evening came, she thought the night so beautiful that she made thecircuit of the elevated gallery which surrounds the church. It affordedher some relief, so calm did the earth appear when viewed from thatheight.CHAPTER III. DEAF.On the following morning, she perceived on awaking, that she hadbeen asleep. This singular thing astonished her. She had been so longunaccustomed to sleep! A joyous ray of the rising sun entered throughher window and touched her face. At the same time with the sun, shebeheld at that window an object which frightened her, the unfortunateface of Quasimodo. She involuntarily closed her eyes again, but in vain;she fancied that she still saw through the rosy lids that gnome mask,oneeyed and gaptoothed. Then, while she still kept her eyes closed,she heard a rough voice saying, very gently,Be not afraid. I am your friend. I came to watch you sleep. It does nothurt you if I come to see you sleep, does it? What difference does itmake to you if I am here when your eyes are closed! Now I am going.Stay, I have placed myself behind the wall. You can open your eyesagain.There was something more plaintive than these words, and that was theaccent in which they were uttered. The gypsy, much touched, openedher eyes. He was, in fact, no longer at the window. She approached theopening, and beheld the poor hunchback crouching in an angle of thewall, in a sad and resigned attitude. She made an effort to surmount therepugnance with which he inspired her. Come, she said to him gently.From the movement of the gypsy lips, Quasimodo thought that shewas driving him away; then he rose and retired limping, slowly, withdrooping head, without even daring to raise to the young girl his gazefull of despair. Do come, she cried, but he continued to retreat. Thenshe darted from her cell, ran to him, and grasped his arm. On feelingher touch him, Quasimodo trembled in every limb. He raised his supplianteye, and seeing that she was leading him back to her quarters, his wholeface beamed with joy and tenderness. She tried to make him enter thecell; but he persisted in remaining on the threshold. No, no, said he;the owl enters not the nest of the lark.Then she crouched down gracefully on her couch, with her goat asleep ather feet. Both remained motionless for several moments, consideringin silence, she so much grace, he so much ugliness. Every moment shediscovered some fresh deformity in Quasimodo. Her glance travelled fromhis knock knees to his humped back, from his humped back to his onlyeye. She could not comprehend the existence of a being so awkwardlyfashioned. Yet there was so much sadness and so much gentleness spreadover all this, that she began to become reconciled to it.He was the first to break the silence. So you were telling me toreturn?She made an affirmative sign of the head, and said, Yes.He understood the motion of the head. Alas! he said, as thoughhesitating whether to finish, I amI am deaf.Poor man! exclaimed the Bohemian, with an expression of kindly pity.He began to smile sadly.You think that that was all that I lacked, do you not? Yes, I amdeaf, that is the way I am made. Tis horrible, is it not? You are sobeautiful!There lay in the accents of the wretched man so profound a consciousnessof his misery, that she had not the strength to say a word. Besides, hewould not have heard her. He went on,Never have I seen my ugliness as at the present moment. When I comparemyself to you, I feel a very great pity for myself, poor unhappy monsterthat I am! Tell me, I must look to you like a beast. You, you are aray of sunshine, a drop of dew, the song of a bird! I am somethingfrightful, neither man nor animal, I know not what, harder, moretrampled under foot, and more unshapely than a pebble stone!Then he began to laugh, and that laugh was the most heartbreaking thingin the world. He continued,Yes, I am deaf; but you shall talk to me by gestures, by signs. I havea master who talks with me in that way. And then, I shall very soon knowyour wish from the movement of your lips, from your look.Well! she interposed with a smile, tell me why you saved me.He watched her attentively while she was speaking.I understand, he replied. You ask me why I saved you. You haveforgotten a wretch who tried to abduct you one night, a wretch to whomyou rendered succor on the following day on their infamous pillory. Adrop of water and a little pity,that is more than I can repay with mylife. You have forgotten that wretch; but he remembers it.She listened to him with profound tenderness. A tear swam in the eye ofthe bellringer, but did not fall. He seemed to make it a sort of pointof honor to retain it.Listen, he resumed, when he was no longer afraid that the tear wouldescape; our towers here are very high, a man who should fall from themwould be dead before touching the pavement; when it shall please youto have me fall, you will not have to utter even a word, a glance willsuffice.Then he rose. Unhappy as was the Bohemian, this eccentric being stillaroused some compassion in her. She made him a sign to remain.No, no, said he; I must not remain too long. I am not at my ease. Itis out of pity that you do not turn away your eyes. I shall go to someplace where I can see you without your seeing me: it will be better so.He drew from his pocket a little metal whistle.Here, said he, when you have need of me, when you wish me to come,when you will not feel too ranch horror at the sight of me, use thiswhistle. I can hear this sound.He laid the whistle on the floor and fled.CHAPTER IV. EARTHENWARE AND CRYSTAL.Day followed day. Calm gradually returned to the soul of la Esmeralda.Excess of grief, like excess of joy is a violent thing which lasts buta short time. The heart of man cannot remain long in one extremity. Thegypsy had suffered so much, that nothing was left her but astonishment.With security, hope had returned to her. She was outside the pale ofsociety, outside the pale of life, but she had a vague feeling that itmight not be impossible to return to it. She was like a dead person, whoshould hold in reserve the key to her tomb.She felt the terrible images which had so long persecuted her,gradually departing. All the hideous phantoms, Pierrat Torterue, JacquesCharmolue, were effaced from her mind, all, even the priest.And then, Phoebus was alive; she was sure of it, she had seen him. Toher the fact of Phoebus being alive was everything. After the series offatal shocks which had overturned everything within her, she had foundbut one thing intact in her soul, one sentiment,her love for thecaptain. Love is like a tree; it sprouts forth of itself, sends itsroots out deeply through our whole being, and often continues toflourish greenly over a heart in ruins.And the inexplicable point about it is that the more blind is thispassion, the more tenacious it is. It is never more solid than when ithas no reason in it.La Esmeralda did not think of the captain without bitterness, no doubt.No doubt it was terrible that he also should have been deceived; that heshould have believed that impossible thing, that he could have conceivedof a stab dealt by her who would have given a thousand lives for him.But, after all, she must not be too angry with him for it; had she notconfessed her crime? had she not yielded, weak woman that she was, totorture? The fault was entirely hers. She should have allowed her fingernails to be torn out rather than such a word to be wrenched from her. Inshort, if she could but see Phoebus once more, for a single minute,only one word would be required, one look, in order to undeceive him,to bring him back. She did not doubt it. She was astonished also at manysingular things, at the accident of Phoebus presence on the day of thepenance, at the young girl with whom he had been. She was his sister, nodoubt. An unreasonable explanation, but she contented herself with it,because she needed to believe that Phoebus still loved her, and lovedher alone. Had he not sworn it to her? What more was needed, simple andcredulous as she was? And then, in this matter, were not appearancesmuch more against her than against him? Accordingly, she waited. Shehoped.Let us add that the church, that vast church, which surrounded her onevery side, which guarded her, which saved her, was itself a sovereigntranquillizer. The solemn lines of that architecture, the religiousattitude of all the objects which surrounded the young girl, the sereneand pious thoughts which emanated, so to speak, from all the pores ofthat stone, acted upon her without her being aware of it. The edificehad also sounds fraught with such benediction and such majesty,that they soothed this ailing soul. The monotonous chanting of thecelebrants, the responses of the people to the priest, sometimesinarticulate, sometimes thunderous, the harmonious trembling of thepainted windows, the organ, bursting forth like a hundred trumpets, thethree belfries, humming like hives of huge bees, that whole orchestra onwhich bounded a gigantic scale, ascending, descending incessantlyfrom the voice of a throng to that of one bell, dulled her memory, herimagination, her grief. The bells, in particular, lulled her. It wassomething like a powerful magnetism which those vast instruments shedover her in great waves.Thus every sunrise found her more calm, breathing better, less pale. Inproportion as her inward wounds closed, her grace and beauty blossomedonce more on her countenance, but more thoughtful, more reposeful. Herformer character also returned to her, somewhat even of her gayety, herpretty pout, her love for her goat, her love for singing, her modesty.She took care to dress herself in the morning in the corner of hercell for fear some inhabitants of the neighboring attics might see herthrough the window.When the thought of Phoebus left her time, the gypsy sometimes thoughtof Quasimodo. He was the sole bond, the sole connection, the solecommunication which remained to her with men, with the living.Unfortunate girl! she was more outside the world than Quasimodo. Sheunderstood not in the least the strange friend whom chance had givenher. She often reproached herself for not feeling a gratitude whichshould close her eyes, but decidedly, she could not accustom herself tothe poor bellringer. He was too ugly.She had left the whistle which he had given her lying on the ground.This did not prevent Quasimodo from making his appearance from time totime during the first few days. She did her best not to turn aside withtoo much repugnance when he came to bring her her basket of provisionsor her jug of water, but he always perceived the slightest movement ofthis sort, and then he withdrew sadly.Once he came at the moment when she was caressing Djali. He stoodpensively for several minutes before this graceful group of the goat andthe gypsy; at last he said, shaking his heavy and illformed head,My misfortune is that I still resemble a man too much. I should like tobe wholly a beast like that goat.She gazed at him in amazement.He replied to the glance,Oh! I well know why, and he went away.On another occasion he presented himself at the door of the cell (whichhe never entered) at the moment when la Esmeralda was singing an oldSpanish ballad, the words of which she did not understand, but which hadlingered in her ear because the gypsy women had lulled her to sleepwith it when she was a little child. At the sight of that villanous formwhich made its appearance so abruptly in the middle of her song, theyoung girl paused with an involuntary gesture of alarm. The unhappybellringer fell upon his knees on the threshold, and clasped his large,misshapen hands with a suppliant air. Oh! he said, sorrowfully,continue, I implore you, and do not drive me away. She did not wish topain him, and resumed her lay, trembling all over. By degrees, however,her terror disappeared, and she yielded herself wholly to the slow andmelancholy air which she was singing. He remained on his knees withhands clasped, as in prayer, attentive, hardly breathing, his gazeriveted upon the gypsy brilliant eyes.On another occasion, he came to her with an awkward and timid air.Listen, he said, with an effort; I have something to say to you. She made him a sign that she was listening. Then he began to sigh, halfopened his lips, appeared for a moment to be on the point of speaking,then he looked at her again, shook his head, and withdrew slowly, withhis brow in his hand, leaving the gypsy stupefied. Among the grotesquepersonages sculptured on the wall, there was one to whom he wasparticularly attached, and with which he often seemed to exchangefraternal glances. Once the gypsy heard him saying to it,Oh! why am not I of stone, like you!At last, one morning, la Esmeralda had advanced to the edge of the roof,and was looking into the Place over the pointed roof of SaintJean leRond. Quasimodo was standing behind her. He had placed himself in thatposition in order to spare the young girl, as far as possible, thedispleasure of seeing him. All at once the gypsy started, a tear and aflash of joy gleamed simultaneously in her eyes, she knelt on thebrink of the roof and extended her arms towards the Place with anguish,exclaiming: Phoebus! come! come! a word, a single word in the name ofheaven! Phoebus! Phoebus! Her voice, her face, her gesture, her wholeperson bore the heartrending expression of a shipwrecked man who ismaking a signal of distress to the joyous vessel which is passing afaroff in a ray of sunlight on the horizon.Quasimodo leaned over the Place, and saw that the object of this tenderand agonizing prayer was a young man, a captain, a handsome cavalierall glittering with arms and decorations, prancing across the end of thePlace, and saluting with his plume a beautiful lady who was smiling athim from her balcony. However, the officer did not hear the unhappy girlcalling him; he was too far away.But the poor deaf man heard. A profound sigh heaved his breast; heturned round; his heart was swollen with all the tears which he wasswallowing; his convulsivelyclenched fists struck against his head, andwhen he withdrew them there was a bunch of red hair in each hand.The gypsy paid no heed to him. He said in a low voice as he gnashed histeeth,Damnation! That is what one should be like! Tis only necessary to behandsome on the outside!Meanwhile, she remained kneeling, and cried with extraordinaryagitation,Oh! there he is alighting from his horse! He is about toenter that house!Phoebus!He does not hear me! Phoebus!How wickedthat woman is to speak to him at the same time with me! Phoebus!Phoebus!The deaf man gazed at her. He understood this pantomime. The poorbellringer eye filled with tears, but he let none fall. All at once hepulled her gently by the border of her sleeve. She turned round. He hadassumed a tranquil air; he said to her,Would you like to have me bring him to you?She uttered a cry of joy.Oh! go! hasten! run! quick! that captain! that captain! bring him tome! I will love you for it!She clasped his knees. He could not refrain from shaking his head sadly.I will bring him to you, he said, in a weak voice. Then he turned hishead and plunged down the staircase with great strides, stifling withsobs.When he reached the Place, he no longer saw anything except the handsomehorse hitched at the door of the Gondelaurier house; the captain hadjust entered there.He raised his eyes to the roof of the church. La Esmeralda was therein the same spot, in the same attitude. He made her a sad sign with hishead; then he planted his back against one of the stone posts of theGondelaurier porch, determined to wait until the captain should comeforth.In the Gondelaurier house it was one of those gala days which precedea wedding. Quasimodo beheld many people enter, but no one come out. Hecast a glance towards the roof from time to time; the gypsy did not stirany more than himself. A groom came and unhitched the horse and led itto the stable of the house.The entire day passed thus, Quasimodo at his post, la Esmeralda on theroof, Phoebus, no doubt, at the feet of FleurdeLys.At length night came, a moonless night, a dark night. Quasimodofixed his gaze in vain upon la Esmeralda; soon she was no more thana whiteness amid the twilight; then nothing. All was effaced, all wasblack.Quasimodo beheld the front windows from top to bottom of theGondelaurier mansion illuminated; he saw the other casements in thePlace lighted one by one, he also saw them extinguished to the verylast, for he remained the whole evening at his post. The officer did notcome forth. When the last passersby had returned home, when the windowsof all the other houses were extinguished, Quasimodo was left entirelyalone, entirely in the dark. There were at that time no lamps in thesquare before NotreDame.Meanwhile, the windows of the Gondelaurier mansion remained lighted,even after midnight. Quasimodo, motionless and attentive, beheld athrong of lively, dancing shadows pass athwart the manycoloredpainted panes. Had he not been deaf, he would have heard more and moredistinctly, in proportion as the noise of sleeping Paris died away, asound of feasting, laughter, and music in the Gondelaurier mansion.Towards one o’clock in the morning, the guests began to take theirleave. Quasimodo, shrouded in darkness watched them all pass out throughthe porch illuminated with torches. None of them was the captain.He was filled with sad thoughts; at times he looked upwards into theair, like a person who is weary of waiting. Great black clouds, heavy,torn, split, hung like crape hammocks beneath the starry dome of night.One would have pronounced them spiders’ webs of the vault of heaven.In one of these moments he suddenly beheld the long window on thebalcony, whose stone balustrade projected above his head, openmysteriously. The frail glass door gave passage to two persons, andclosed noiselessly behind them; it was a man and a woman.It was not without difficulty that Quasimodo succeeded in recognizingin the man the handsome captain, in the woman the young lady whom hehad seen welcome the officer in the morning from that very balcony. Theplace was perfectly dark, and a double crimson curtain which had fallenacross the door the very moment it closed again, allowed no light toreach the balcony from the apartment.The young man and the young girl, so far as our deaf man could judge,without hearing a single one of their words, appeared to abandonthemselves to a very tender têteatête. The young girl seemed to haveallowed the officer to make a girdle for her of his arm, and gentlyrepulsed a kiss.Quasimodo looked on from below at this scene which was all the morepleasing to witness because it was not meant to be seen. He contemplatedwith bitterness that beauty, that happiness. After all, nature was notdumb in the poor fellow, and his human sensibility, all maliciouslycontorted as it was, quivered no less than any other. He thought of themiserable portion which Providence had allotted to him; that woman andthe pleasure of love, would pass forever before his eyes, and that heshould never do anything but behold the felicity of others. But thatwhich rent his heart most in this sight, that which mingled indignationwith his anger, was the thought of what the gypsy would suffer could shebehold it. It is true that the night was very dark, that la Esmeralda,if she had remained at her post (and he had no doubt of this), was veryfar away, and that it was all that he himself could do to distinguishthe lovers on the balcony. This consoled him.Meanwhile, their conversation grew more and more animated. The younglady appeared to be entreating the officer to ask nothing more of her.Of all this Quasimodo could distinguish only the beautiful claspedhands, the smiles mingled with tears, the young girl glances directedto the stars, the eyes of the captain lowered ardently upon her.Fortunately, for the young girl was beginning to resist but feebly, thedoor of the balcony suddenly opened once more and an old dame appeared;the beauty seemed confused, the officer assumed an air of displeasure,and all three withdrew.A moment later, a horse was champing his bit under the porch, and thebrilliant officer, enveloped in his night cloak, passed rapidly beforeQuasimodo.The bellringer allowed him to turn the corner of the street, then he ranafter him with his apelike agility, shouting: Hey there! captain!The captain halted.What wants this knave with me? he said, catching sight through thegloom of that hipshot form which ran limping after him.Meanwhile, Quasimodo had caught up with him, and had boldly grasped hishorse bridle: Follow me, captain; there is one here who desires tospeak with you!_Cornemahom_! grumbled Phoebus, here a villanous; ruffled birdwhich I fancy I have seen somewhere. Holà master, will you let myhorse bridle alone?Captain, replied the deaf man, do you not ask me who it is?I tell you to release my horse, retorted Phoebus, impatiently. Whatmeans the knave by clinging to the bridle of my steed? Do you take myhorse for a gallows?Quasimodo, far from releasing the bridle, prepared to force him toretrace his steps. Unable to comprehend the captain resistance, hehastened to say to him,Come, captain, tis a woman who is waiting for you. He added with aneffort: A woman who loves you.A rare rascal! said the captain, who thinks me obliged to go to allthe women who love me! or who say they do. And what if, by chance, sheshould resemble you, you face of a screechowl? Tell the woman who hassent you that I am about to marry, and that she may go to the devil!Listen, exclaimed Quasimodo, thinking to overcome his hesitation witha word, come, monseigneur! tis the gypsy whom you know!This word did, indeed, produce a great effect on Phoebus, but not of thekind which the deaf man expected. It will be remembered that our gallantofficer had retired with FleurdeLys several moments before Quasimodohad rescued the condemned girl from the hands of Charmolue. Afterwards,in all his visits to the Gondelaurier mansion he had taken care not tomention that woman, the memory of whom was, after all, painful to him;and on her side, FleurdeLys had not deemed it politic to tell him thatthe gypsy was alive. Hence Phoebus believed poor Similar to be dead,and that a month or two had elapsed since her death. Let us add thatfor the last few moments the captain had been reflecting on the profounddarkness of the night, the supernatural ugliness, the sepulchral voiceof the strange messenger; that it was past midnight; that the street wasdeserted, as on the evening when the surly monk had accosted him; andthat his horse snorted as it looked at Quasimodo.The gypsy! he exclaimed, almost frightened. Look here, do you comefrom the other world?And he laid his hand on the hilt of his dagger.Quick, quick, said the deaf man, endeavoring to drag the horse along;this way!Phoebus dealt him a vigorous kick in the breast.Quasimodo eye flashed. He made a motion to fling himself on thecaptain. Then he drew himself up stiffly and said,Oh! how happy you are to have some one who loves you!He emphasized the words some one, and loosing the horse bridle,Begone!Phoebus spurred on in all haste, swearing. Quasimodo watched himdisappear in the shades of the street.Oh! said the poor deaf man, in a very low voice; to refuse that!He reentered NotreDame, lighted his lamp and climbed to the toweragain. The gypsy was still in the same place, as he had supposed.She flew to meet him as far off as she could see him. Alone! shecried, clasping her beautiful hands sorrowfully.I could not find him, said Quasimodo coldly.You should have waited all night, she said angrily.He saw her gesture of wrath, and understood the reproach.I will lie in wait for him better another time, he said, dropping hishead.Begone! she said to him.He left her. She was displeased with him. He preferred to have herabuse him rather than to have afflicted her. He had kept all the pain tohimself.From that day forth, the gypsy no longer saw him. He ceased to come toher cell. At the most she occasionally caught a glimpse at the summit ofthe towers, of the bellringer face turned sadly to her. But as soon asshe perceived him, he disappeared.We must admit that she was not much grieved by this voluntary absenceon the part of the poor hunchback. At the bottom of her heart she wasgrateful to him for it. Moreover, Quasimodo did not deceive himself onthis point.She no longer saw him, but she felt the presence of a good genius abouther. Her provisions were replenished by an invisible hand during herslumbers. One morning she found a cage of birds on her window. Therewas a piece of sculpture above her window which frightened her. She hadshown this more than once in Quasimodo presence. One morning, forall these things happened at night, she no longer saw it, it had beenbroken. The person who had climbed up to that carving must have riskedhis life.Sometimes, in the evening, she heard a voice, concealed beneath the windscreen of the bell tower, singing a sad, strange song, as though to lullher to sleep. The lines were unrhymed, such as a deaf person can make.     _Ne regarde pas la figure,     Jeune fille, regarde le coeur.     Le coeur d’un beau jeune homme est souvent difforme.     Il y a des coeurs ou l’amour ne se conserve pas_.     _Jeune fille, le sapin n’est pas beau,     N’est pas beau comme le peuplier,     Mais il garde son feuillage l’hiver_.     _Hélas! a quoi bon dire cela?     Ce qui n’est pas beau a tort d’être;     La beauté n’aime que la beauté,     Avril tourne le dos a Janvier_.     _La beauté est parfaite,     La beauté peut tout,     La beauté est la seule chose qui n’existe pàs a demi_.     _Le corbeau ne vole que le jour,     Le hibou ne vole que la nuit,     Le cygne vole la nuit et le jour_.    Look not at the face, young girl, look at the heart. Theheart of a handsome young man is often deformed. There are hearts inwhich love does not keep. Young girl, the pine is not beautiful; it isnot beautiful like the poplar, but it keeps its foliage in winter. Alas!What is the use of saying that? That which is not beautiful has no rightto exist; beauty loves only beauty; April turns her back on January.Beauty is perfect, beauty can do all things, beauty is the only thingwhich does not exist by halves. The raven flies only by day, the owlflies only by night, the swan flies by day and by night.One morning, on awaking, she saw on her window two vases filled withflowers. One was a very beautiful and very brilliant but cracked vase ofglass. It had allowed the water with which it had been filled to escape,and the flowers which it contained were withered. The other was anearthenware pot, coarse and common, but which had preserved all itswater, and its flowers remained fresh and crimson.I know not whether it was done intentionally, but La Esmeralda took thefaded nosegay and wore it all day long upon her breast.That day she did not hear the voice singing in the tower.She troubled herself very little about it. She passed her days incaressing Djali, in watching the door of the Gondelaurier house, intalking to herself about Phoebus, and in crumbling up her bread for theswallows.She had entirely ceased to see or hear Quasimodo. The poor bellringerseemed to have disappeared from the church. One night, nevertheless,when she was not asleep, but was thinking of her handsome captain, sheheard something breathing near her cell. She rose in alarm, and saw bythe light of the moon, a shapeless mass lying across her door on theoutside. It was Quasimodo asleep there upon the stones.CHAPTER V. THE KEY TO THE RED DOOR.In the meantime, public minor had informed the archdeacon of themiraculous manner in which the gypsy had been saved. When he learned it,he knew not what his sensations were. He had reconciled himself to laEsmeralda death. In that matter he was tranquil; he had reached thebottom of personal suffering. The human heart (Dora Claude had meditatedupon these matters) can contain only a certain quantity of despair.When the sponge is saturated, the sea may pass over it without causing asingle drop more to enter it.Now, with la Esmeralda dead, the sponge was soaked, all was at an end onthis earth for Dom Claude. But to feel that she was alive, and Phoebusalso, meant that tortures, shocks, alternatives, life, were beginningagain. And Claude was weary of all this.When he heard this news, he shut himself in his cell in the cloister. Heappeared neither at the meetings of the chapter nor at the services. Heclosed his door against all, even against the bishop. He remained thusimmured for several weeks. He was believed to be ill. And so he was, infact.What did he do while thus shut up? With what thoughts was theunfortunate man contending? Was he giving final battle to his formidablepassion? Was he concocting a final plan of death for her and ofperdition for himself?His Jehan, his cherished brother, his spoiled child, came once to hisdoor, knocked, swore, entreated, gave his name half a score of times.Claude did not open.He passed whole days with his face close to the panes of his window.From that window, situated in the cloister, he could see la Esmeraldachamber. He often saw herself with her goat, sometimes with Quasimodo.He remarked the little attentions of the ugly deaf man, his obedience,his delicate and submissive ways with the gypsy. He recalled, for he hada good memory, and memory is the tormentor of the jealous, he recalledthe singular look of the bellringer, bent on the dancer upon a certainevening. He asked himself what motive could have impelled Quasimodo tosave her. He was the witness of a thousand little scenes between thegypsy and the deaf man, the pantomime of which, viewed from afar andcommented on by his passion, appeared very tender to him. He distrustedthe capriciousness of women. Then he felt a jealousy which he couldnever have believed possible awakening within him, a jealousy which madehim redden with shame and indignation: One might condone the captain,but this one! This thought upset him.His nights were frightful. As soon as he learned that the gypsy wasalive, the cold ideas of spectre and tomb which had persecuted him fora whole day vanished, and the flesh returned to goad him. He turned andtwisted on his couch at the thought that the darkskinned maiden was sonear him.Every night his delirious imagination represented la Esmeralda to him inall the attitudes which had caused his blood to boil most. He beheld heroutstretched upon the poniarded captain, her eyes closed, her beautifulbare throat covered with Phoebus blood, at that moment of bliss whenthe archdeacon had imprinted on her pale lips that kiss whose burn theunhappy girl, though half dead, had felt. He beheld her, again, strippedby the savage hands of the torturers, allowing them to bare and toenclose in the boot with its iron screw, her tiny foot, her delicaterounded leg, her white and supple knee. Again he beheld that ivory kneewhich alone remained outside of Torterue horrible apparatus. Lastly,he pictured the young girl in her shift, with the rope about her neck,shoulders bare, feet bare, almost nude, as he had seen her on that lastday. These images of voluptuousness made him clench his fists, and ashiver run along his spine.One night, among others, they heated so cruelly his virgin and priestlyblood, that he bit his pillow, leaped from his bed, flung on a surpliceover his shirt, and left his cell, lamp in hand, half naked, wild, hiseyes aflame.He knew where to find the key to the red door, which connected thecloister with the church, and he always had about him, as the readerknows, the key of the staircase leading to the towers.CHAPTER VI. CONTINUATION OF THE KEY TO THE RED DOOR.That night, la Esmeralda had fallen asleep in her cell, full ofoblivion, of hope, and of sweet thoughts. She had already been asleepfor some time, dreaming as always, of Phoebus, when it seemed to herthat she heard a noise near her. She slept lightly and uneasily, thesleep of a bird; a mere nothing waked her. She opened her eyes. Thenight was very dark. Nevertheless, she saw a figure gazing at herthrough the window; a lamp lighted up this apparition. The moment thatthe figure saw that la Esmeralda had perceived it, it blew out thelamp. But the young girl had had time to catch a glimpse of it; her eyesclosed again with terror.Oh! she said in a faint voice, the priest!All her past unhappiness came back to her like a flash of lightning. Shefell back on her bed, chilled.A moment later she felt a touch along her body which made her shudderso that she straightened herself up in a sitting posture, wide awake andfurious.The priest had just slipped in beside her. He encircled her with botharms.She tried to scream and could not.Begone, monster! begone assassin! she said, in a voice which was lowand trembling with wrath and terror.Mercy! mercy! murmured the priest, pressing his lips to her shoulder.She seized his bald head by its remnant of hair and tried to thrustaside his kisses as though they had been bites.Mercy! repeated the unfortunate man. If you but knew what my love foryou is! Tis fire, melted lead, a thousand daggers in my heart.She stopped his two arms with superhuman force.Let me go, she said, or I will spit in your face!He released her. Vilify me, strike me, be malicious! Do what you will!But have mercy! love me!Then she struck him with the fury of a child. She made her beautifulhands stiff to bruise his face. Begone, demon!Love me! love mepity! cried the poor priest returning her blows withcaresses.All at once she felt him stronger than herself.There must be an end to this! he said, gnashing his teeth.She was conquered, palpitating in his arms, and in his power. She felt awanton hand straying over her. She made a last effort, and began to cry:Help! Help! A vampire! a vampire!Nothing came. Djali alone was awake and bleating with anguish.Hush! said the panting priest.All at once, as she struggled and crawled on the floor, the gypsy handcame in contact with something cold and metallicit was Quasimodowhistle. She seized it with a convulsive hope, raised it to her lips andblew with all the strength that she had left. The whistle gave a clear,piercing sound.What is that? said the priest.Almost at the same instant he felt himself raised by a vigorous arm. Thecell was dark; he could not distinguish clearly who it was that heldhim thus; but he heard teeth chattering with rage, and there was justsufficient light scattered among the gloom to allow him to see above hishead the blade of a large knife.The priest fancied that he perceived the form of Quasimodo. He assumedthat it could be no one but he. He remembered to have stumbled, ashe entered, over a bundle which was stretched across the door on theoutside. But, as the newcomer did not utter a word, he knew not whatto think. He flung himself on the arm which held the knife, crying:Quasimodo! He forgot, at that moment of distress, that Quasimodo wasdeaf.In a twinkling, the priest was overthrown and a leaden knee rested onhis breast.From the angular imprint of that knee he recognized Quasimodo; but whatwas to be done? how could he make the other recognize him? the darknessrendered the deaf man blind.He was lost. The young girl, pitiless as an enraged tigress, did notintervene to save him. The knife was approaching his head; themoment was critical. All at once, his adversary seemed stricken withhesitation.No blood on her! he said in a dull voice.It was, in fact, Quasimodo voice.Then the priest felt a large hand dragging him feet first out of thecell; it was there that he was to die. Fortunately for him, the moon hadrisen a few moments before.When they had passed through the door of the cell, its pale rays fellupon the priest countenance. Quasimodo looked him full in the face, atrembling seized him, and he released the priest and shrank back.The gypsy, who had advanced to the threshold of her cell, beheldwith surprise their roles abruptly changed. It was now the priest whomenaced, Quasimodo who was the suppliant.The priest, who was overwhelming the deaf man with gestures of wrath andreproach, made the latter a violent sign to retire.The deaf man dropped his head, then he came and knelt at the gypsydoor,Monseigneur, he said, in a grave and resigned voice, you shalldo all that you please afterwards, but kill me first.So saying, he presented his knife to the priest. The priest, besidehimself, was about to seize it. But the young girl was quicker than be;she wrenched the knife from Quasimodo hands and burst into a franticlaugh,Approach, she said to the priest.She held the blade high. The priest remained undecided.She would certainly have struck him.Then she added with a pitiless expression, well aware that she was aboutto pierce the priest heart with thousands of redhot irons,Ah! I know that Phoebus is not dead!The priest overturned Quasimodo on the floor with a kick, and, quiveringwith rage, darted back under the vault of the staircase.When he was gone, Quasimodo picked up the whistle which had just savedthe gypsy.It was getting rusty, he said, as he handed it back to her; then heleft her alone.The young girl, deeply agitated by this violent scene, fell backexhausted on her bed, and began to sob and weep. Her horizon wasbecoming gloomy once more.The priest had groped his way back to his cell.It was settled. Dom Claude was jealous of Quasimodo!He repeated with a thoughtful air his fatal words: No one shall haveher.BOOK TENTH.CHAPTER I. GRINGOIRE HAS MANY GOOD IDEAS IN SUCCESSION.RUE DESBERNARDINS.As soon as Pierre Gringoire had seen how this whole affair wasturning, and that there would decidedly be the rope, hanging, and otherdisagreeable things for the principal personages in this comedy, he hadnot cared to identify himself with the matter further. The outcastswith whom he had remained, reflecting that, after all, it was the bestcompany in Paris,the outcasts had continued to interest themselves inbehalf of the gypsy. He had thought it very simple on the part ofpeople who had, like herself, nothing else in prospect but Charmolue andTorterue, and who, unlike himself, did not gallop through the regionsof imagination between the wings of Pegasus. From their remarks, hehad learned that his wife of the broken crock had taken refuge inNotreDame, and he was very glad of it. But he felt no temptation togo and see her there. He meditated occasionally on the little goat, andthat was all. Moreover, he was busy executing feats of strength duringthe day for his living, and at night he was engaged in composing amemorial against the Bishop of Paris, for he remembered having beendrenched by the wheels of his mills, and he cherished a grudge againsthim for it. He also occupied himself with annotating the fine work ofBaudryleRouge, Bishop of Noyon and Tournay, _De Cupa Petrarum_, whichhad given him a violent passion for architecture, an inclination whichhad replaced in his heart his passion for hermeticism, of which it was,moreover, only a natural corollary, since there is an intimate relationbetween hermeticism and masonry. Gringoire had passed from the love ofan idea to the love of the form of that idea.One day he had halted near Saint Germainl’Auxerrois, at the corner ofa mansion called Forl’Evêque (the Bishop Tribunal), which stoodopposite another called ForleRoi (the King Tribunal). At thisForl’Evêque, there was a charming chapel of the fourteenth century,whose apse was on the street. Gringoire was devoutly examining itsexterior sculptures. He was in one of those moments of egotistical,exclusive, supreme, enjoyment when the artist beholds nothing in theworld but art, and the world in art. All at once he feels a hand laidgravely on his shoulder. He turns round. It was his old friend, hisformer master, monsieur the archdeacon.He was stupefied. It was a long time since he had seen the archdeacon,and Dom Claude was one of those solemn and impassioned men, a meetingwith whom always upsets the equilibrium of a sceptical philosopher.The archdeacon maintained silence for several minutes, during whichGringoire had time to observe him. He found Dom Claude greatly changed;pale as a winter morning, with hollow eyes, and hair almost white. Thepriest broke the silence at length, by saying, in a tranquil but glacialtone,How do you do, Master Pierre?My health? replied Gringoire. Eh! eh! one can say both one thing andanother on that score. Still, it is good, on the whole. I take not toomuch of anything. You know, master, that the secret of keeping well,according to Hippocrates; _id est: cibi, potus, somni, venus, omniamoderata sint_.So you have no care, Master Pierre? resumed the archdeacon, gazingintently at Gringoire.None, i’ faith!And what are you doing now?You see, master. I am examining the chiselling of these stones, and themanner in which yonder basrelief is thrown out.The priest began to smile with that bitter smile which raises only onecorner of the mouth.And that amuses you?Tis paradise! exclaimed Gringoire. And leaning over the sculptureswith the fascinated air of a demonstrator of living phenomena: Doyou not think, for instance, that yon metamorphosis in basrelief isexecuted with much adroitness, delicacy and patience? Observe thatslender column. Around what capital have you seen foliage more tenderand better caressed by the chisel. Here are three raised bosses ofJean Maillevin. They are not the finest works of this great master.Nevertheless, the naivete, the sweetness of the faces, the gayety of theattitudes and draperies, and that inexplicable charm which is mingledwith all the defects, render the little figures very diverting anddelicate, perchance, even too much so. You think that it is notdiverting?Yes, certainly! said the priest.And if you were to see the interior of the chapel! resumed the poet,with his garrulous enthusiasm. Carvings everywhere. Tis as thicklyclustered as the head of a cabbage! The apse is of a very devout, and sopeculiar a fashion that I have never beheld anything like it elsewhere!Dom Claude interrupted him,You are happy, then?Gringoire replied warmly;On my honor, yes! First I loved women, then animals. Now I love stones.They are quite as amusing as women and animals, and less treacherous.The priest laid his hand on his brow. It was his habitual gesture.Really?Stay! said Gringoire, one has one pleasures! He took the arm ofthe priest, who let him have his way, and made him enter the staircaseturret of Forl’Evêque. Here is a staircase! every time that I see it Iam happy. It is of the simplest and rarest manner of steps in Paris. Allthe steps are bevelled underneath. Its beauty and simplicity consistin the interspacing of both, being a foot or more wide, which areinterlaced, interlocked, fitted together, enchained enchased, interlinedone upon another, and bite into each other in a manner that is trulyfirm and graceful.And you desire nothing?No.And you regret nothing?Neither regret nor desire. I have arranged my mode of life.What men arrange, said Claude, things disarrange.I am a Pyrrhonian philosopher, replied Gringoire, and I hold allthings in equilibrium.And how do you earn your living?I still make epics and tragedies now and then; but that which brings mein most is the industry with which you are acquainted, master; carryingpyramids of chairs in my teeth.The trade is but a rough one for a philosopher.Tis still equilibrium, said Gringoire. When one has an idea, oneencounters it in everything.I know that, replied the archdeacon.After a silence, the priest resumed,You are, nevertheless, tolerably poor?Poor, yes; unhappy, no.At that moment, a trampling of horses was heard, and our twointerlocutors beheld defiling at the end of the street, a company of theking unattached archers, their lances borne high, an officer attheir head. The cavalcade was brilliant, and its march resounded on thepavement.How you gaze at that officer! said Gringoire, to the archdeacon.Because I think I recognize him.What do you call him?I think, said Claude, that his name is Phoebus de Châteaupers.Phoebus! A curious name! There is also a Phoebus, Comte de Foix. Iremember having known a wench who swore only by the name of Phoebus.Come away from here, said the priest. I have something to say toyou.From the moment of that troop passing, some agitation had piercedthrough the archdeacon glacial envelope. He walked on. Gringoirefollowed him, being accustomed to obey him, like all who had onceapproached that man so full of ascendency. They reached in silence theRue des Bernardins, which was nearly deserted. Here Dom Claude paused.What have you to say to me, master? Gringoire asked him.Do you not think that the dress of those cavaliers whom we have justseen is far handsomer than yours and mine?Gringoire tossed his head.I’ faith! I love better my red and yellow jerkin, than those scalesof iron and steel. A fine pleasure to produce, when you walk, the samenoise as the Quay of Old Iron, in an earthquake!So, Gringoire, you have never cherished envy for those handsome fellowsin their military doublets?Envy for what, monsieur the archdeacon? their strength, their armor,their discipline? Better philosophy and independence in rags. I preferto be the head of a fly rather than the tail of a lion.That is singular, said the priest dreamily. Yet a handsome uniform isa beautiful thing.Gringoire, perceiving that he was in a pensive mood, quitted him to goand admire the porch of a neighboring house. He came back clapping hishands.If you were less engrossed with the fine clothes of men of war,monsieur the archdeacon, I would entreat you to come and see this door.I have always said that the house of the Sieur Aubry had the most superbentrance in the world.Pierre Gringoire, said the archdeacon, What have you done with thatlittle gypsy dancer?La Esmeralda? You change the conversation very abruptly.Was she not your wife?Yes, by virtue of a broken crock. We were to have four years of it. Bythe way, added Gringoire, looking at the archdeacon in a half banteringway, are you still thinking of her?And you think of her no longer?Very little. I have so many things. Good heavens, how pretty thatlittle goat was!Had she not saved your life?Tis true, pardieu!Well, what has become of her? What have you done with her?I cannot tell you. I believe that they have hanged her.You believe so?I am not sure. When I saw that they wanted to hang people, I retiredfrom the game.That is all you know of it?Wait a bit. I was told that she had taken refuge in NotreDame, andthat she was safe there, and I am delighted to hear it, and I have notbeen able to discover whether the goat was saved with her, and that isall I know.I will tell you more, cried Dom Claude; and his voice, hitherto low,slow, and almost indistinct, turned to thunder. She has in fact, takenrefuge in NotreDame. But in three days justice will reclaim her, andshe will be hanged on the Grève. There is a decree of parliament.That annoying, said Gringoire.The priest, in an instant, became cold and calm again.And who the devil, resumed the poet, has amused himself withsoliciting a decree of reintegration? Why couldn’t they leave parliamentin peace? What harm does it do if a poor girl takes shelter under theflying buttresses of NotreDame, beside the swallows’ nests?There are satans in this world, remarked the archdeacon.Tis devilish badly done, observed Gringoire.The archdeacon resumed after a silence,So, she saved your life?Among my good friends the outcasts. A little more or a little less andI should have been hanged. They would have been sorry for it today.Would not you like to do something for her?I ask nothing better, Dom Claude; but what if I entangle myself in somevillanous affair?What matters it?Bah! what matters it? You are good, master, that you are! I have twogreat works already begun.The priest smote his brow. In spite of the calm which he affected, aviolent gesture betrayed his internal convulsions from time to time.How is she to be saved?Gringoire said to him; Master, I will reply to you; _Il padelt_, whichmeans in Turkish, God is our hope.’How is she to be saved? repeated Claude dreamily.Gringoire smote his brow in his turn.Listen, master. I have imagination; I will devise expedients for you.What if one were to ask her pardon from the king?Of Louis XI.! A pardon!Why not?To take the tiger bone from him!Gringoire began to seek fresh expedients.Well, stay! Shall I address to the midwives a request accompanied bythe declaration that the girl is with child!This made the priest hollow eye flash.With child! knave! do you know anything of this?Gringoire was alarmed by his air. He hastened to say, Oh, no, not I!Our marriage was a real _forismaritagium_. I stayed outside. But onemight obtain a respite, all the same.Madness! Infamy! Hold your tongue!You do wrong to get angry, muttered Gringoire. One obtains a respite;that does no harm to any one, and allows the midwives, who are poorwomen, to earn forty deniers parisis.The priest was not listening to him!But she must leave that place, nevertheless! he murmured, the decreeis to be executed within three days. Moreover, there will be no decree;that Quasimodo! Women have very depraved tastes! He raised his voice:Master Pierre, I have reflected well; there is but one means of safetyfor her.What? I see none myself.Listen, Master Pierre, remember that you owe your life to her. I willtell you my idea frankly. The church is watched night and day; onlythose are allowed to come out, who have been seen to enter. Henceyou can enter. You will come. I will lead you to her. You will changeclothes with her. She will take your doublet; you will take herpetticoat.So far, it goes well, remarked the philosopher, and then?And then? she will go forth in your garments; you will remain withhers. You will be hanged, perhaps, but she will be saved.Gringoire scratched his ear, with a very serious air. Stay! said he,that is an idea which would never have occurred to me unaided.At Dom Claude proposition, the open and benign face of the poet hadabruptly clouded over, like a smiling Italian landscape, when an unluckysquall comes up and dashes a cloud across the sun.Well! Gringoire, what say you to the means?I say, master, that I shall not be hanged, perchance, but that I shallbe hanged indubitably.That concerns us not.The deuce! said Gringoire.She has saved your life. Tis a debt that you are discharging.There are a great many others which I do not discharge.Master Pierre, it is absolutely necessary.The archdeacon spoke imperiously.Listen, Dom Claude, replied the poet in utter consternation. You clingto that idea, and you are wrong. I do not see why I should get myselfhanged in some one else place.What have you, then, which attaches you so strongly to life?Oh! a thousand reasons!What reasons, if you please?What? The air, the sky, the morning, the evening, the moonlight, mygood friends the thieves, our jeers with the old hags of gobetweens,the fine architecture of Paris to study, three great books to make, oneof them being against the bishops and his mills; and how can I tell all?Anaxagoras said that he was in the world to admire the sun. And then,from morning till night, I have the happiness of passing all my dayswith a man of genius, who is myself, which is very agreeable.A head fit for a mule bell! muttered the archdeacon. Oh! tell me whopreserved for you that life which you render so charming to yourself? Towhom do you owe it that you breathe that air, behold that sky, and canstill amuse your lark mind with your whimsical nonsense and madness?Where would you be, had it not been for her? Do you then desire thatshe through whom you are alive, should die? that she should die, thatbeautiful, sweet, adorable creature, who is necessary to the light ofthe world and more divine than God, while you, half wise, and half fool,a vain sketch of something, a sort of vegetable, which thinks that itwalks, and thinks that it thinks, you will continue to live with thelife which you have stolen from her, as useless as a candle in broaddaylight? Come, have a little pity, Gringoire; be generous in your turn;it was she who set the example.The priest was vehement. Gringoire listened to him at first with anundecided air, then he became touched, and wound up with a grimace whichmade his pallid face resemble that of a newborn infant with an attackof the colic.You are pathetic! said he, wiping away a tear. Well! I will thinkabout it. That a queer idea of yours.After all, he continued aftera pause, who knows? perhaps they will not hang me. He who becomesbetrothed does not always marry. When they find me in that littlelodging so grotesquely muffled in petticoat and coif, perchance theywill burst with laughter. And then, if they do hang me,well! thehalter is as good a death as any. Tis a death worthy of a sage who haswavered all his life; a death which is neither flesh nor fish, like themind of a veritable sceptic; a death all stamped with Pyrrhonism andhesitation, which holds the middle station betwixt heaven and earth,which leaves you in suspense. Tis a philosopher death, and I wasdestined thereto, perchance. It is magnificent to die as one has lived.The priest interrupted him: Is it agreed.What is death, after all? pursued Gringoire with exaltation. Adisagreeable moment, a tollgate, the passage of little to nothingness.Some one having asked Cercidas, the Megalopolitan, if he were willing todie: Why not?’ he replied; for after my death I shall see those greatmen, Pythagoras among the philosophers, Hecataeus among historians,Homer among poets, Olympus among musicians.’The archdeacon gave him his hand: It is settled, then? You will cometomorrow?This gesture recalled Gringoire to reality.Ah! i’ faith no! he said in the tone of a man just waking up. Behanged! tis too absurd. I will not.Farewell, then! and the archdeacon added between his teeth: I’ll findyou again!I do not want that devil of a man to find me, thought Gringoire; andhe ran after Dom Claude. Stay, monsieur the archdeacon, no illfeelingbetween old friends! You take an interest in that girl, my wife, I mean,and tis well. You have devised a scheme to get her out of NotreDame,but your way is extremely disagreeable to me, Gringoire. If I had onlyanother one myself! I beg to say that a luminous inspiration has justoccurred to me. If I possessed an expedient for extricating her froma dilemma, without compromising my own neck to the extent of a singlerunning knot, what would you say to it? Will not that suffice you? Is itabsolutely necessary that I should be hanged, in order that you may becontent?The priest tore out the buttons of his cassock with impatience: Streamof words! What is your plan?Yes, resumed Gringoire, talking to himself and touching his nose withhis forefinger in sign of meditation,that it!The thieves arebrave fellows!The tribe of Egypt love her!They will rise at thefirst word!Nothing easier!A sudden stroke.Under cover of thedisorder, they will easily carry her off!Beginning tomorrow evening.They will ask nothing better.The plan! speak, cried the archdeacon shaking him.Gringoire turned majestically towards him: Leave me! You see that I amcomposing. He meditated for a few moments more, then began to clap hishands over his thought, crying: Admirable! success is sure!The plan! repeated Claude in wrath.Gringoire was radiant.Come, that I may tell you that very softly. Tis a truly gallantcounterplot, which will extricate us all from the matter. Pardieu, itmust be admitted that I am no fool.He broke off.Oh, by the way! is the little goat with the wench?Yes. The devil take you!They would have hanged it also, would they not?What is that to me?Yes, they would have hanged it. They hanged a sow last month. Theheadsman loveth that; he eats the beast afterwards. Take my prettyDjali! Poor little lamb!Malediction! exclaimed Dom Claude. You are the executioner. Whatmeans of safety have you found, knave? Must your idea be extracted withthe forceps?Very fine, master, this is it.Gringoire bent his head to the archdeacon head and spoke to him in avery low voice, casting an uneasy glance the while from one end to theother of the street, though no one was passing. When he had finished,Dom Claude took his hand and said coldly: Tis well. Farewell untiltomorrow.Until tomorrow, repeated Gringoire. And, while the archdeacon wasdisappearing in one direction, he set off in the other, saying tohimself in a low voice: Here a grand affair, Monsieur PierreGringoire. Never mind! Tis not written that because one is of smallaccount one should take fright at a great enterprise. Bitou carried agreat bull on his shoulders; the waterwagtails, the warblers, and thebuntings traverse the ocean.CHAPTER II. TURN VAGABOND.On reentering the cloister, the archdeacon found at the door of hiscell his brother Jehan du Moulin, who was waiting for him, and who hadbeguiled the tedium of waiting by drawing on the wall with a bit ofcharcoal, a profile of his elder brother, enriched with a monstrousnose.Dom Claude hardly looked at his brother; his thoughts were elsewhere.That merry scamp face whose beaming had so often restored serenityto the priest sombre physiognomy, was now powerless to melt the gloomwhich grew more dense every day over that corrupted, mephitic, andstagnant soul.Brother, said Jehan timidly, I am come to see you.The archdeacon did not even raise his eyes.What then?Brother, resumed the hypocrite, you are so good to me, and you giveme such wise counsels that I always return to you.What next?Alas! brother, you were perfectly right when you said to me,Jehan!Jehan! _cessat doctorum doctrina, discipulorum disciplina_. Jehan,be wise, Jehan, be learned, Jehan, pass not the night outside of thecollege without lawful occasion and due leave of the master. Cudgelnot the Picards: _noli, Joannes, verberare Picardos_. Rot not like anunlettered ass, _quasi asinus illitteratus_, on the straw seats of theschool. Jehan, allow yourself to be punished at the discretion of themaster. Jehan go every evening to chapel, and sing there an anthemwith verse and orison to Madame the glorious Virgin Mary.Alas! whatexcellent advice was that!And then?Brother, you behold a culprit, a criminal, a wretch, a libertine, a manof enormities! My dear brother, Jehan hath made of your counsels strawand dung to trample under foot. I have been well chastised for it, andGod is extraordinarily just. As long as I had money, I feasted, I lead amad and joyous life. Oh! how ugly and crabbed behind is debauch whichis so charming in front! Now I have no longer a blank; I have sold mynapery, my shirt and my towels; no more merry life! The beautiful candleis extinguished and I have henceforth, only a wretched tallow dipwhich smokes in my nose. The wenches jeer at me. I drink water.I amoverwhelmed with remorse and with creditors.The rest? said the archdeacon.Alas! my very dear brother, I should like to settle down to a betterlife. I come to you full of contrition, I am penitent. I make myconfession. I beat my breast violently. You are quite right in wishingthat I should some day become a licentiate and submonitor in thecollege of Torchi. At the present moment I feel a magnificent vocationfor that profession. But I have no more ink and I must buy some; Ihave no more paper, I have no more books, and I must buy some. For thispurpose, I am greatly in need of a little money, and I come to you,brother, with my heart full of contrition.Is that all?Yes, said the scholar. A little money.I have none.Then the scholar said, with an air which was both grave and resolute:Well, brother, I am sorry to be obliged to tell you that very fineoffers and propositions are being made to me in another quarter.You will not give me any money? No. In that case I shall become aprofessional vagabond.As he uttered these monstrous words, he assumed the mien of Ajax,expecting to see the lightnings descend upon his head.The archdeacon said coldly to him,Become a vagabond.Jehan made him a deep bow, and descended the cloister stairs, whistling.At the moment when he was passing through the courtyard of the cloister,beneath his brother window, he heard that window open, raised his eyesand beheld the archdeacon severe head emerge.Go to the devil! said Dom Claude; here is the last money which youwill get from me?At the same time, the priest flung Jehan a purse, which gave the scholara big bump on the forehead, and with which Jehan retreated, both vexedand content, like a dog who had been stoned with marrow bones.CHAPTER III. LONG LIVE MIRTH.The reader has probably not forgotten that a part of the Cour deMiracles was enclosed by the ancient wall which surrounded the city, agoodly number of whose towers had begun, even at that epoch, to fall toruin. One of these towers had been converted into a pleasure resort bythe vagabonds. There was a drainshop in the underground story, and therest in the upper stories. This was the most lively, and consequentlythe most hideous, point of the whole outcast den. It was a sort ofmonstrous hive, which buzzed there night and day. At night, when theremainder of the beggar horde slept, when there was no longer a windowlighted in the dingy façades of the Place, when not a cry was any longerto be heard proceeding from those innumerable families, those anthillsof thieves, of wenches, and stolen or bastard children, the merry towerwas still recognizable by the noise which it made, by the scarlet lightwhich, flashing simultaneously from the airholes, the windows, thefissures in the cracked walls, escaped, so to speak, from its everypore.The cellar then, was the dramshop. The descent to it was through alow door and by a staircase as steep as a classic Alexandrine. Over thedoor, by way of a sign there hung a marvellous daub, representing newsons and dead chickens, with this, pun below: _Aux sonneurs pour lestrépassés_,The wringers for the dead.    _Sols neufs: poulets tués_.One evening when the curfew was sounding from all the belfries in Paris,the sergeants of the watch might have observed, had it been granted tothem to enter the formidable Court of Miracles, that more tumult thanusual was in progress in the vagabonds’ tavern, that more drinking wasbeing done, and louder swearing. Outside in the Place, there, were manygroups conversing in low tones, as when some great plan is being framed,and here and there a knave crouching down engaged in sharpening avillanous iron blade on a pavingstone.Meanwhile, in the tavern itself, wine and gaming offered such a powerfuldiversion to the ideas which occupied the vagabonds’ lair that evening,that it would have been difficult to divine from the remarks of thedrinkers, what was the matter in hand. They merely wore a gayer air thanwas their wont, and some weapon could be seen glittering between thelegs of each of them,a sickle, an axe, a big twoedged sword or thehook of an old hackbut.The room, circular in form, was very spacious; but the tables wereso thickly set and the drinkers so numerous, that all that the taverncontained, men, women, benches, beerjugs, all that were drinking, allthat were sleeping, all that were playing, the well, the lame, seemedpiled up pellmell, with as much order and harmony as a heap of oystershells. There were a few tallow dips lighted on the tables; but the realluminary of this tavern, that which played the part in this dramshop ofthe chandelier of an opera house, was the fire. This cellar was so dampthat the fire was never allowed to go out, even in midsummer; an immensechimney with a sculptured mantel, all bristling with heavy iron andironsand cooking utensils, with one of those huge fires of mixed wood andpeat which at night, in village streets make the reflection of forgewindows stand out so red on the opposite walls. A big dog gravely seatedin the ashes was turning a spit loaded with meat before the coals.Great as was the confusion, after the first glance one could distinguishin that multitude, three principal groups which thronged around threepersonages already known to the reader. One of these personages,fantastically accoutred in many an oriental rag, was Mathias HungadiSpicali, Duke of Egypt and Bohemia. The knave was seated on a table withhis legs crossed, and in a loud voice was bestowing his knowledge ofmagic, both black and white, on many a gaping face which surrounded him.Another rabble pressed close around our old friend, the valiant King ofThunes, armed to the teeth. Clopin Trouillefou, with a very serious airand in a low voice, was regulating the distribution of an enormous caskof arms, which stood wide open in front of him and from whence pouredout in profusion, axes, swords, bassinets, coats of mail, broadswords,lanceheads, arrows, and viretons, like apples and grapes from a hornof plenty. Every one took something from the cask, one a morion, anothera long, straight sword, another a dagger with a crossshaped hilt. Thevery children were arming themselves, and there were even cripples inbowls who, in armor and cuirass, made their way between the legs of thedrinkers, like great beetles.    An arrow with a pyramidal head of iron and copper spiralwings, by which a rotatory motion was communicated.Finally, a third audience, the most noisy, the most jovial, and the mostnumerous, encumbered benches and tables, in the midst of which haranguedand swore a flutelike voice, which escaped from beneath a heavy armor,complete from casque to spurs. The individual who had thus screwed awhole outfit upon his body, was so hidden by his warlike accoutrementsthat nothing was to be seen of his person save an impertinent, red,snub nose, a rosy mouth, and bold eyes. His belt was full of daggers andponiards, a huge sword on his hip, a rusted crossbow at his left, and avast jug of wine in front of him, without reckoning on his right, a fatwench with her bosom uncovered. All mouths around him were laughing,cursing, and drinking.Add twenty secondary groups, the waiters, male and female, running withjugs on their heads, gamblers squatting over taws, merelles, dice,vachettes, the ardent game of tringlet, quarrels in one corner, kissesin another, and the reader will have some idea of this whole picture,over which flickered the light of a great, flaming fire, which made athousand huge and grotesque shadows dance over the walls of the drinkingshop.    A game played on a checkerboard containing three concentricsets of squares, with small stones. The game consisted in getting threestones in a row.As for the noise, it was like the inside of a bell at full peal.The drippingpan, where crackled a rain of grease, filled with itscontinual sputtering the intervals of these thousand dialogues, whichintermingled from one end of the apartment to the other.In the midst of this uproar, at the extremity of the tavern, on thebench inside the chimney, sat a philosopher meditating with his feet inthe ashes and his eyes on the brands. It was Pierre Gringoire.Be quick! make haste, arm yourselves! we set out on the march in anhour! said Clopin Trouillefou to his thieves.A wench was humming,     _Bonsoir mon père et ma mere,     Les derniers couvrent le feu_.    Good night, father and mother, the last cover up the fire.Two card players were disputing,Knave! cried the reddest faced of the two, shaking his fist at theother; I’ll mark you with the club. You can take the place of Mistigriin the pack of cards of monseigneur the king.Ugh! roared a Norman, recognizable by his nasal accent; we are packedin here like the saints of Caillouville!My sons, the Duke of Egypt was saying to his audience, in a falsettovoice, sorceresses in France go to the witches’ sabbath withoutbroomsticks, or grease, or steed, merely by means of some magic words.The witches of Italy always have a buck waiting for them at their door.All are bound to go out through the chimney.The voice of the young scamp armed from head to foot, dominated theuproar.Hurrah! hurrah! he was shouting. My first day in armor! Outcast! Iam an outcast. Give me something to drink. My friends, my name is JehanFrollo du Moulin, and I am a gentleman. My opinion is that if God were a_gendarme_, he would turn robber. Brothers, we are about to set out ona fine expedition. Lay siege to the church, burst in the doors, drag outthe beautiful girl, save her from the judges, save her from the priests,dismantle the cloister, burn the bishop in his palaceall this we willdo in less time than it takes for a burgomaster to eat a spoonful ofsoup. Our cause is just, we will plunder NotreDame and that will be theend of it. We will hang Quasimodo. Do you know Quasimodo, ladies?Have you seen him make himself breathless on the big bell on a grandPentecost festival! _Corne du Père_! tis very fine! One would say hewas a devil mounted on a man. Listen to me, my friends; I am a vagabondto the bottom of my heart, I am a member of the slang thief gang inmy soul, I was born an independent thief. I have been rich, and I havedevoured all my property. My mother wanted to make an officer of me; myfather, a subdeacon; my aunt, a councillor of inquests; my grandmother,prothonotary to the king; my great aunt, a treasurer of the shortrobe,and I have made myself an outcast. I said this to my father,who spit his curse in my face; to my mother, who set to weeping andchattering, poor old lady, like yonder fagot on the andirons. Long livemirth! I am a real Bicêtre. Waitress, my dear, more wine. I have stillthe wherewithal to pay. I want no more Surène wine. It distresses mythroat. I’d as lief, _corboeuf_! gargle my throat with a basket.Meanwhile, the rabble applauded with shouts of laughter; and seeing thatthe tumult was increasing around him, the scholar cried,.Oh! what a fine noise! _Populi debacchantis populosa debacchatio_! Then he began to sing, his eye swimming in ecstasy, in the tone of acanon intoning vespers, _quæ cantica! quæ organa! quæ cantilenoe!quæ meloclioe hic sine fine decantantur! Sonant melliflua hymnorumorgana, suavissima angelorum melodia, cantica canticorum mira_! He brokeoff: Tavernkeeper of the devil, give me some supper!There was a moment of partial silence, during which the sharp voice ofthe Duke of Egypt rose, as he gave instructions to his Bohemians.The weasel is called Adrune; the fox, Bluefoot, or the Racer of theWoods; the wolf, Grayfoot, or Goldfoot; the bear the Old Man, orGrandfather. The cap of a gnome confers invisibility, and causes one tobehold invisible things. Every toad that is baptized must be clad in redor black velvet, a bell on its neck, a bell on its feet. The godfatherholds its head, the godmother its hinder parts. Tis the demonSidragasum who hath the power to make wenches dance stark naked.By the mass! interrupted Jehan, I should like to be the demonSidragasum.Meanwhile, the vagabonds continued to arm themselves and whisper at theother end of the dramshop.That poor Esmeralda! said a Bohemian. She is our sister. She must betaken away from there.Is she still at NotreDame? went on a merchant with the appearance ofa Jew.Yes, pardieu!Well! comrades! exclaimed the merchant, to NotreDame! So much thebetter, since there are in the chapel of Saints Féréol and Ferrutiontwo statues, the one of John the Baptist, the other of SaintAntoine, ofsolid gold, weighing together seven marks of gold and fifteen estellins;and the pedestals are of silvergilt, of seventeen marks, five ounces. Iknow that; I am a goldsmith.Here they served Jehan with his supper. As he threw himself back on thebosom of the wench beside him, he exclaimed,By Saint VoultdeLucques, whom people call Saint Goguelu, I amperfectly happy. I have before me a fool who gazes at me with the smoothface of an archduke. Here is one on my left whose teeth are so long thatthey hide his chin. And then, I am like the Marshal de Gié at the siegeof Pontoise, I have my right resting on a hillock. _VentreMahom_!Comrade! you have the air of a merchant of tennisballs; and you comeand sit yourself beside me! I am a nobleman, my friend! Trade isincompatible with nobility. Get out of that! Hola hé! You others, don’tfight! What, Baptiste CroqueOison, you who have such a fine nose aregoing to risk it against the big fists of that lout! Fool! _Non cuiquamdatum est habere nasum_not every one is favored with a nose. You arereally divine, Jacqueline RongeOreille! tis a pity that you have nohair! Holà! my name is Jehan Frollo, and my brother is an archdeacon.May the devil fly off with him! All that I tell you is the truth. Inturning vagabond, I have gladly renounced the half of a house situatedin paradise, which my brother had promised me. _Dimidiam domum inparadiso_. I quote the text. I have a fief in the Rue Tirechappe, andall the women are in love with me, as true as Saint Eloy was anexcellent goldsmith, and that the five trades of the good city ofParis are the tanners, the tawers, the makers of crossbelts, thepursemakers, and the sweaters, and that Saint Laurent was burntwith eggshells. I swear to you, comrades.     _Que je ne beuvrai de piment,     Devant un an, si je cy ment_.    That I will drink no spiced and honeyed wine for a year,if I am lying now.Tis moonlight, my charmer; see yonder through the window how thewind is tearing the clouds to tatters! Even thus will I do toyour gorget.Wenches, wipe the children noses and snuff thecandles.Christ and Mahom! What am I eating here, Jupiter? Ohé!innkeeper! the hair which is not on the heads of your hussies one findsin your omelettes. Old woman! I like bald omelettes. May the devilconfound you!A fine hostelry of Beelzebub, where the hussies combtheir heads with the forks!     Et je n’ai moi,     Par la sangDieu!     Ni foi, ni loi,     Ni feu, ni lieu,     Ni roi,     Ni Dieu.    And by the blood of God, I have neither faith nor law, nor   fire nor dwellingplace, nor king nor God.In the meantime, Clopin Trouillefou had finished the distribution ofarms. He approached Gringoire, who appeared to be plunged in a profoundrevery, with his feet on an andiron.Friend Pierre, said the King of Thunes, what the devil are youthinking about?Gringoire turned to him with a melancholy smile.I love the fire, my dear lord. Not for the trivial reason that firewarms the feet or cooks our soup, but because it has sparks. Sometimes Ipass whole hours in watching the sparks. I discover a thousand things inthose stars which are sprinkled over the black background of the hearth.Those stars are also worlds.Thunder, if I understand you! said the outcast. Do you know whato’clock it is?I do not know, replied Gringoire.Clopin approached the Duke of Egypt.Comrade Mathias, the time we have chosen is not a good one. King LouisXI. is said to be in Paris.Another reason for snatching our sister from his claws, replied theold Bohemian.You speak like a man, Mathias, said the King of Thunes. Moreover,we will act promptly. No resistance is to be feared in the church. Thecanons are hares, and we are in force. The people of the parliament willbe well balked tomorrow when they come to seek her! Guts of the pope Idon’t want them to hang the pretty girl!Chopin quitted the dramshop.Meanwhile, Jehan was shouting in a hoarse voice:I eat, I drink, I am drunk, I am Jupiter! Eh! Pierre, the Slaughterer,if you look at me like that again, I’ll fillip the dust off your nosefor you.Gringoire, torn from his meditations, began to watch the wild and noisyscene which surrounded him, muttering between his teeth: _Luxuriosares vinum et tumultuosa ebrietas_. Alas! what good reason I have not todrink, and how excellently spoke SaintBenoit: _Vinum apostatare facitetiam sapientes!_’At that moment, Clopin returned and shouted in a voice of thunder:Midnight!At this word, which produced the effect of the call to boot and saddleon a regiment at a halt, all the outcasts, men, women, children,rushed in a mass from the tavern, with great noise of arms and old ironimplements.The moon was obscured.The Cour des Miracles was entirely dark. There was not a single light.One could make out there a throng of men and women conversing in lowtones. They could be heard buzzing, and a gleam of all sorts of weaponswas visible in the darkness. Clopin mounted a large stone.To your ranks, Argot! he cried. Fall into line, Egypt! Form ranks,Galilee!    Men of the brotherhood of slang: thieves.A movement began in the darkness. The immense multitude appeared to formin a column. After a few minutes, the King of Thunes raised his voiceonce more,Now, silence to march through Paris! The password is, Little swordin pocket!’ The torches will not be lighted till we reach NotreDame!Forward, march!Ten minutes later, the cavaliers of the watch fled in terror before along procession of black and silent men which was descending towardsthe Pont an Change, through the tortuous streets which pierce theclosebuilt neighborhood of the markets in every direction.CHAPTER IV. AN AWKWARD FRIEND.That night, Quasimodo did not sleep. He had just made his last round ofthe church. He had not noticed, that at the moment when he was closingthe doors, the archdeacon had passed close to him and betrayed somedispleasure on seeing him bolting and barring with care the enormousiron locks which gave to their large leaves the solidity of a wall. DomClaude air was even more preoccupied than usual. Moreover, since thenocturnal adventure in the cell, he had constantly abused Quasimodo,but in vain did he ill treat, and even beat him occasionally, nothingdisturbed the submission, patience, the devoted resignation ofthe faithful bellringer. He endured everything on the part of thearchdeacon, insults, threats, blows, without murmuring a complaint. Atthe most, he gazed uneasily after Dom Claude when the latter ascendedthe staircase of the tower; but the archdeacon had abstained frompresenting himself again before the gypsy eyes.On that night, accordingly, Quasimodo, after having cast a glance at hispoor bells which he so neglected now, Jacqueline, Marie, and Thibauld,mounted to the summit of the Northern tower, and there setting his darklanturn, well closed, upon the leads, he began to gaze at Paris. Thenight, as we have already said, was very dark. Paris which, so tospeak was not lighted at that epoch, presented to the eye a confusedcollection of black masses, cut here and there by the whitish curve ofthe Seine. Quasimodo no longer saw any light with the exception of onewindow in a distant edifice, whose vague and sombre profile was outlinedwell above the roofs, in the direction of the Porte SainteAntoine.There also, there was some one awake.As the only eye of the bellringer peered into that horizon of mist andnight, he felt within him an inexpressible uneasiness. For several dayshe had been upon his guard. He had perceived men of sinister mien, whonever took their eyes from the young girl asylum, prowling constantlyabout the church. He fancied that some plot might be in process offormation against the unhappy refugee. He imagined that there existeda popular hatred against her, as against himself, and that it was verypossible that something might happen soon. Hence he remained upon histower on the watch, dreaming in his dreamplace, as Rabelais says,with his eye directed alternately on the cell and on Paris, keepingfaithful guard, like a good dog, with a thousand suspicions in his mind.All at once, while he was scrutinizing the great city with that eyewhich nature, by a sort of compensation, had made so piercing that itcould almost supply the other organs which Quasimodo lacked, itseemed to him that there was something singular about the Quay de laVieillePelleterie, that there was a movement at that point, that theline of the parapet, standing out blackly against the whiteness of thewater was not straight and tranquil, like that of the other quays, butthat it undulated to the eye, like the waves of a river, or like theheads of a crowd in motion.This struck him as strange. He redoubled his attention. The movementseemed to be advancing towards the City. There was no light. It lastedfor some time on the quay; then it gradually ceased, as though thatwhich was passing were entering the interior of the island; thenit stopped altogether, and the line of the quay became straight andmotionless again.At the moment when Quasimodo was lost in conjectures, it seemed tohim that the movement had reappeared in the Rue du Parvis, which isprolonged into the city perpendicularly to the façade of NotreDame.At length, dense as was the darkness, he beheld the head of a columndebouch from that street, and in an instant a crowdof which nothingcould be distinguished in the gloom except that it was a crowdspreadover the Place.This spectacle had a terror of its own. It is probable that thissingular procession, which seemed so desirous of concealing itself underprofound darkness, maintained a silence no less profound. Nevertheless,some noise must have escaped it, were it only a trampling. But thisnoise did not even reach our deaf man, and this great multitude, ofwhich he saw hardly anything, and of which he heard nothing, though itwas marching and moving so near him, produced upon him the effect of arabble of dead men, mute, impalpable, lost in a smoke. It seemed tohim, that he beheld advancing towards him a fog of men, and that he sawshadows moving in the shadow.Then his fears returned to him, the idea of an attempt against the gypsypresented itself once more to his mind. He was conscious, in a confusedway, that a violent crisis was approaching. At that critical moment hetook counsel with himself, with better and prompter reasoning than onewould have expected from so badly organized a brain. Ought he to awakenthe gypsy? to make her escape? Whither? The streets were invested, thechurch backed on the river. No boat, no issue!There was but onething to be done; to allow himself to be killed on the threshold ofNotreDame, to resist at least until succor arrived, if it shouldarrive, and not to trouble la Esmeralda sleep. This resolution oncetaken, he set to examining the enemy with more tranquillity.The throng seemed to increase every moment in the church square. Only,he presumed that it must be making very little noise, since the windowson the Place remained closed. All at once, a flame flashed up, and inan instant seven or eight lighted torches passed over the heads of thecrowd, shaking their tufts of flame in the deep shade. Quasimodo thenbeheld distinctly surging in the Parvis a frightful herd of men andwomen in rags, armed with scythes, pikes, billhooks and partisans, whosethousand points glittered. Here and there black pitchforks formed hornsto the hideous faces. He vaguely recalled this populace, and thoughtthat he recognized all the heads who had saluted him as Pope of theFools some months previously. One man who held a torch in one hand anda club in the other, mounted a stone post and seemed to be haranguingthem. At the same time the strange army executed several evolutions, asthough it were taking up its post around the church. Quasimodo picked uphis lantern and descended to the platform between the towers, in orderto get a nearer view, and to spy out a means of defence.Clopin Trouillefou, on arriving in front of the lofty portal ofNotreDame had, in fact, ranged his troops in order of battle. Althoughhe expected no resistance, he wished, like a prudent general, topreserve an order which would permit him to face, at need, a suddenattack of the watch or the police. He had accordingly stationed hisbrigade in such a manner that, viewed from above and from a distance,one would have pronounced it the Roman triangle of the battle ofEcnomus, the boar head of Alexander or the famous wedge of GustavusAdolphus. The base of this triangle rested on the back of the Place insuch a manner as to bar the entrance of the Rue du Parvis; one of itssides faced HôtelDieu, the other the Rue SaintPierreauxBoeufs.Clopin Trouillefou had placed himself at the apex with the Duke ofEgypt, our friend Jehan, and the most daring of the scavengers.An enterprise like that which the vagabonds were now undertaking againstNotreDame was not a very rare thing in the cities of the Middle Ages.What we now call the police did not exist then. In populous cities,especially in capitals, there existed no single, central, regulatingpower. Feudalism had constructed these great communities in a singularmanner. A city was an assembly of a thousand seigneuries, whichdivided it into compartments of all shapes and sizes. Hence, a thousandconflicting establishments of police; that is to say, no police at all.In Paris, for example, independently of the hundred and fortyone lordswho laid claim to a manor, there were five and twenty who laid claim toa manor and to administering justice, from the Bishop of Paris, who hadfive hundred streets, to the Prior of NotreDame des Champs, who hadfour. All these feudal justices recognized the suzerain authority of theking only in name. All possessed the right of control over the roads.All were at home. Louis XI., that indefatigable worker, who so largelybegan the demolition of the feudal edifice, continued by Richelieu andLouis XIV. for the profit of royalty, and finished by Mirabeau for thebenefit of the people,Louis XI. had certainly made an effort to breakthis network of seignories which covered Paris, by throwing violentlyacross them all two or three troops of general police. Thus, in 1465, anorder to the inhabitants to light candles in their windows at nightfall,and to shut up their dogs under penalty of death; in the same year,an order to close the streets in the evening with iron chains, and aprohibition to wear daggers or weapons of offence in the streetsat night. But in a very short time, all these efforts at communallegislation fell into abeyance. The bourgeois permitted the wind toblow out their candles in the windows, and their dogs to stray; the ironchains were stretched only in a state of siege; the prohibition towear daggers wrought no other changes than from the name of the RueCoupeGueule to the name of the RueCoupeGorge which is an evidentprogress. The old scaffolding of feudal jurisdictions remained standing;an immense aggregation of bailiwicks and seignories crossing eachother all over the city, interfering with each other, entangled in oneanother, enmeshing each other, trespassing on each other; a uselessthicket of watches, subwatches and counterwatches, over which, witharmed force, passed brigandage, rapine, and sedition. Hence, in thisdisorder, deeds of violence on the part of the populace directed againsta palace, a hotel, or house in the most thickly populated quarters, werenot unheardof occurrences. In the majority of such cases, the neighborsdid not meddle with the matter unless the pillaging extended tothemselves. They stopped up their ears to the musket shots, closed theirshutters, barricaded their doors, allowed the matter to be concludedwith or without the watch, and the next day it was said in Paris,Etienne Barbette was broken open last night. The Marshal de Clermontwas seized last night, etc. Hence, not only the royal habitations, theLouvre, the Palace, the Bastille, the Tournelles, but simply seignorialresidences, the PetitBourbon, the Hôtel de Sens, the Hôtel d’Angoulême, etc., had battlements on their walls, and machicolations overtheir doors. Churches were guarded by their sanctity. Some, among thenumber NotreDame, were fortified. The Abbey of SaintGermandesPreswas castellated like a baronial mansion, and more brass expended aboutit in bombards than in bells. Its fortress was still to be seen in 1610.Today, barely its church remains.    Cutthroat. Coupegueule being the vulgar word for cutweazand.Let us return to NotreDame.When the first arrangements were completed, and we must say, to thehonor of vagabond discipline, that Clopin orders were executed insilence, and with admirable precision, the worthy chief of the band,mounted on the parapet of the church square, and raised his hoarse andsurly voice, turning towards NotreDame, and brandishing his torch whoselight, tossed by the wind, and veiled every moment by its own smoke,made the reddish façade of the church appear and disappear before theeye.To you, Louis de Beaumont, bishop of Paris, counsellor in the Court ofParliament, I, Clopin Trouillefou, king of Thunes, grand Coësre, princeof Argot, bishop of fools, I say: Our sister, falsely condemned formagic, hath taken refuge in your church, you owe her asylum and safety.Now the Court of Parliament wishes to seize her once more there, and youconsent to it; so that she would be hanged tomorrow in the Grève, ifGod and the outcasts were not here. If your church is sacred, so is oursister; if our sister is not sacred, neither is your church. That is whywe call upon you to return the girl if you wish to save your church, orwe will take possession of the girl again and pillage the church, whichwill be a good thing. In token of which I here plant my banner, and mayGod preserve you, bishop of Paris.Quasimodo could not, unfortunately, hear these words uttered with a sortof sombre and savage majesty. A vagabond presented his banner to Clopin,who planted it solemnly between two pavingstones. It was a pitchforkfrom whose points hung a bleeding quarter of carrion meat.That done, the King of Thunes turned round and cast his eyes over hisarmy, a fierce multitude whose glances flashed almost equally with theirpikes. After a momentary pause,Forward, my Sons! he cried; to work,locksmiths!Thirty bold men, square shouldered, and with picklock faces, steppedfrom the ranks, with hammers, pincers, and bars of iron on theirshoulders. They betook themselves to the principal door of the church,ascended the steps, and were soon to be seen squatting under the arch,working at the door with pincers and levers; a throng of vagabondsfollowed them to help or look on. The eleven steps before the portalwere covered with them.But the door stood firm. The devil! tis hard and obstinate! said one.It is old, and its gristles have become bony, said another. Courage,comrades! resumed Clopin. I wager my head against a dipper that youwill have opened the door, rescued the girl, and despoiled the chiefaltar before a single beadle is awake. Stay! I think I hear the lockbreaking up.Clopin was interrupted by a frightful uproar which resounded behind himat that moment. He wheeled round. An enormous beam had just fallen fromabove; it had crushed a dozen vagabonds on the pavement with the soundof a cannon, breaking in addition, legs here and there in the crowdof beggars, who sprang aside with cries of terror. In a twinkling, thenarrow precincts of the church parvis were cleared. The locksmiths,although protected by the deep vaults of the portal, abandoned the doorand Clopin himself retired to a respectful distance from the church.I had a narrow escape! cried Jehan. I felt the wind, of it,_têtedeboeuf_! but Pierre the Slaughterer is slaughtered!It is impossible to describe the astonishment mingled with fright whichfell upon the ruffians in company with this beam.They remained for several minutes with their eyes in the air, moredismayed by that piece of wood than by the king twenty thousandarchers.Satan! muttered the Duke of Egypt, this smacks of magic!Tis the moon which threw this log at us, said Andry the Red.Call the moon the friend of the Virgin, after that! went on FrancoisChanteprune.A thousand popes! exclaimed Clopin, you are all fools! But he didnot know how to explain the fall of the beam.Meanwhile, nothing could be distinguished on the façade, to whose summitthe light of the torches did not reach. The heavy beam lay in the middleof the enclosure, and groans were heard from the poor wretches who hadreceived its first shock, and who had been almost cut in twain, on theangle of the stone steps.The King of Thunes, his first amazement passed, finally found anexplanation which appeared plausible to his companions.Throat of God! are the canons defending themselves? To the sack, then!to the sack!To the sack! repeated the rabble, with a furious hurrah. A dischargeof crossbows and hackbuts against the front of the church followed.At this detonation, the peaceable inhabitants of the surrounding houseswoke up; many windows were seen to open, and nightcaps and hands holdingcandles appeared at the casements.Fire at the windows, shouted Clopin. The windows were immediatelyclosed, and the poor bourgeois, who had hardly had time to casta frightened glance on this scene of gleams and tumult, returned,perspiring with fear to their wives, asking themselves whether thewitches’ sabbath was now being held in the parvis of NotreDame,or whether there was an assault of Burgundians, as in 64. Then thehusbands thought of theft; the wives, of rape; and all trembled.To the sack! repeated the thieves’ crew; but they dared not approach.They stared at the beam, they stared at the church. The beam did notstir, the edifice preserved its calm and deserted air; but somethingchilled the outcasts.To work, locksmiths! shouted Trouillefou. Let the door be forced!No one took a step.Beard and belly! said Clopin, here be men afraid of a beam.An old locksmith addressed himCaptain, tis not the beam which bothers us, tis the door, which isall covered with iron bars. Our pincers are powerless against it.What more do you want to break it in? demanded Clopin.Ah! we ought to have a battering ram.The King of Thunes ran boldly to the formidable beam, and placed hisfoot upon it: Here is one! he exclaimed; tis the canons who send itto you. And, making a mocking salute in the direction of the church,Thanks, canons!This piece of bravado produced its effects,the spell of the beam wasbroken. The vagabonds recovered their courage; soon the heavy joist,raised like a feather by two hundred vigorous arms, was flung with furyagainst the great door which they had tried to batter down. At the sightof that long beam, in the halflight which the infrequent torches ofthe brigands spread over the Place, thus borne by that crowd of men whodashed it at a run against the church, one would have thought that hebeheld a monstrous beast with a thousand feet attacking with loweredhead the giant of stone.At the shock of the beam, the half metallic door sounded like an immensedrum; it was not burst in, but the whole cathedral trembled, and thedeepest cavities of the edifice were heard to echo.At the same moment, a shower of large stones began to fall from the topof the façade on the assailants.The devil! cried Jehan, are the towers shaking their balustrades downon our heads?But the impulse had been given, the King of Thunes had set the example.Evidently, the bishop was defending himself, and they only battered thedoor with the more rage, in spite of the stones which cracked skullsright and left.It was remarkable that all these stones fell one by one; but theyfollowed each other closely. The thieves always felt two at a time, oneon their legs and one on their heads. There were few which did notdeal their blow, and a large layer of dead and wounded lay bleedingand panting beneath the feet of the assailants who, now grown furious,replaced each other without intermission. The long beam continued tobelabor the door, at regular intervals, like the clapper of a bell, thestones to rain down, the door to groan.The reader has no doubt divined that this unexpected resistance whichhad exasperated the outcasts came from Quasimodo.Chance had, unfortunately, favored the brave deaf man.When he had descended to the platform between the towers, his ideas wereall in confusion. He had run up and down along the gallery for severalminutes like a madman, surveying from above, the compact mass ofvagabonds ready to hurl itself on the church, demanding the safety ofthe gypsy from the devil or from God. The thought had occurred to him ofascending to the southern belfry and sounding the alarm, but beforehe could have set the bell in motion, before Marie voice could haveuttered a single clamor, was there not time to burst in the door of thechurch ten times over? It was precisely the moment when the locksmithswere advancing upon it with their tools. What was to be done?All at once, he remembered that some masons had been at work all dayrepairing the wall, the timberwork, and the roof of the south tower.This was a flash of light. The wall was of stone, the roof of lead, thetimberwork of wood. (That prodigious timberwork, so dense that it wascalled the forest.)Quasimodo hastened to that tower. The lower chambers were, in fact, fullof materials. There were piles of rough blocks of stone, sheets of leadin rolls, bundles of laths, heavy beams already notched with the saw,heaps of plaster.Time was pressing, The pikes and hammers were at work below. With astrength which the sense of danger increased tenfold, he seized oneof the beamsthe longest and heaviest; he pushed it out through aloophole, then, grasping it again outside of the tower, he made it slidealong the angle of the balustrade which surrounds the platform, andlet it fly into the abyss. The enormous timber, during that fall of ahundred and sixty feet, scraping the wall, breaking the carvings, turnedmany times on its centre, like the arm of a windmill flying off alonethrough space. At last it reached the ground, the horrible cry arose,and the black beam, as it rebounded from the pavement, resembled aserpent leaping.Quasimodo beheld the outcasts scatter at the fall of the beam, likeashes at the breath of a child. He took advantage of their fright, andwhile they were fixing a superstitious glance on the club which hadfallen from heaven, and while they were putting out the eyes of thestone saints on the front with a discharge of arrows and buckshot,Quasimodo was silently piling up plaster, stones, and rough blocks ofstone, even the sacks of tools belonging to the masons, on the edge ofthe balustrade from which the beam had already been hurled.Thus, as soon as they began to batter the grand door, the shower ofrough blocks of stone began to fall, and it seemed to them that thechurch itself was being demolished over their heads.Any one who could have beheld Quasimodo at that moment would have beenfrightened. Independently of the projectiles which he had piled upon thebalustrade, he had collected a heap of stones on the platform itself. Asfast as the blocks on the exterior edge were exhausted, he drew on theheap. Then he stooped and rose, stooped and rose again with incredibleactivity. His huge gnome head bent over the balustrade, then anenormous stone fell, then another, then another. From time to time, hefollowed a fine stone with his eye, and when it did good execution, hesaid, Hum!Meanwhile, the beggars did not grow discouraged. The thick door on whichthey were venting their fury had already trembled more than twentytimes beneath the weight of their oaken batteringram, multiplied by thestrength of a hundred men. The panels cracked, the carved work flew intosplinters, the hinges, at every blow, leaped from their pins, the planksyawned, the wood crumbled to powder, ground between the iron sheathing.Fortunately for Quasimodo, there was more iron than wood.Nevertheless, he felt that the great door was yielding. Although he didnot hear it, every blow of the ram reverberated simultaneously in thevaults of the church and within it. From above he beheld the vagabonds,filled with triumph and rage, shaking their fists at the gloomy façade;and both on the gypsy account and his own he envied the wings of theowls which flitted away above his head in flocks.His shower of stone blocks was not sufficient to repel the assailants.At this moment of anguish, he noticed, a little lower down than thebalustrade whence he was crushing the thieves, two long stone gutterswhich discharged immediately over the great door; the internal orificeof these gutters terminated on the pavement of the platform. An ideaoccurred to him; he ran in search of a fagot in his bellringer den,placed on this fagot a great many bundles of laths, and many rolls oflead, munitions which he had not employed so far, and having arrangedthis pile in front of the hole to the two gutters, he set it on firewith his lantern.During this time, since the stones no longer fell, the outcasts ceasedto gaze into the air. The bandits, panting like a pack of hounds who areforcing a boar into his lair, pressed tumultuously round the greatdoor, all disfigured by the battering ram, but still standing. They werewaiting with a quiver for the great blow which should split it open.They vied with each other in pressing as close as possible, in order todash among the first, when it should open, into that opulent cathedral,a vast reservoir where the wealth of three centuries had been piled up.They reminded each other with roars of exultation and greedy lust, ofthe beautiful silver crosses, the fine copes of brocade, the beautifultombs of silver gilt, the great magnificences of the choir, thedazzling festivals, the Christmasses sparkling with torches, theEasters sparkling with sunshine,all those splendid solemneties whereinchandeliers, ciboriums, tabernacles, and reliquaries, studded the altarswith a crust of gold and diamonds. Certainly, at that fine moment,thieves and pseudo sufferers, doctors in stealing, and vagabonds, werethinking much less of delivering the gypsy than of pillaging NotreDame.We could even easily believe that for a goodly number among them laEsmeralda was only a pretext, if thieves needed pretexts.All at once, at the moment when they were grouping themselves round theram for a last effort, each one holding his breath and stiffening hismuscles in order to communicate all his force to the decisive blow, ahowl more frightful still than that which had burst forth and expiredbeneath the beam, rose among them. Those who did not cry out, those whowere still alive, looked. Two streams of melted lead were falling fromthe summit of the edifice into the thickest of the rabble. That sea ofmen had just sunk down beneath the boiling metal, which had made, at thetwo points where it fell, two black and smoking holes in the crowd, suchas hot water would make in snow. Dying men, half consumed and groaningwith anguish, could be seen writhing there. Around these two principalstreams there were drops of that horrible rain, which scattered over theassailants and entered their skulls like gimlets of fire. It was a heavyfire which overwhelmed these wretches with a thousand hailstones.The outcry was heartrending. They fled pellmell, hurling the beam uponthe bodies, the boldest as well as the most timid, and the parvis wascleared a second time.All eyes were raised to the top of the church. They beheld there anextraordinary sight. On the crest of the highest gallery, higher thanthe central rose window, there was a great flame rising between the twotowers with whirlwinds of sparks, a vast, disordered, and furious flame,a tongue of which was borne into the smoke by the wind, from time totime. Below that fire, below the gloomy balustrade with its trefoilsshowing darkly against its glare, two spouts with monster throats werevomiting forth unceasingly that burning rain, whose silvery stream stoodout against the shadows of the lower façade. As they approached theearth, these two jets of liquid lead spread out in sheaves, like waterspringing from the thousand holes of a wateringpot. Above the flame,the enormous towers, two sides of each of which were visible in sharpoutline, the one wholly black, the other wholly red, seemed still morevast with all the immensity of the shadow which they cast even to thesky.Their innumerable sculptures of demons and dragons assumed a lugubriousaspect. The restless light of the flame made them move to the eye. Therewere griffins which had the air of laughing, gargoyles which one fanciedone heard yelping, salamanders which puffed at the fire, tarasqueswhich sneezed in the smoke. And among the monsters thus roused fromtheir sleep of stone by this flame, by this noise, there was one whowalked about, and who was seen, from time to time, to pass across theglowing face of the pile, like a bat in front of a candle.    The representation of a monstrous animal solemnly drawn aboutin Tarascon and other French towns.Without doubt, this strange beacon light would awaken far away, thewoodcutter of the hills of Bicêtre, terrified to behold the giganticshadow of the towers of NotreDame quivering over his heaths.A terrified silence ensued among the outcasts, during which nothing washeard, but the cries of alarm of the canons shut up in their cloister,and more uneasy than horses in a burning stable, the furtive soundof windows hastily opened and still more hastily closed, the internalhurlyburly of the houses and of the HôtelDieu, the wind in the flame,the last deathrattle of the dying, and the continued crackling of therain of lead upon the pavement.In the meanwhile, the principal vagabonds had retired beneath the porchof the Gondelaurier mansion, and were holding a council of war.The Duke of Egypt, seated on a stone post, contemplated thephantasmagorical bonfire, glowing at a height of two hundred feet in theair, with religious terror. Clopin Trouillefou bit his huge fists withrage.Impossible to get in! he muttered between his teeth.An old, enchanted church! grumbled the aged Bohemian, Mathias HungadiSpicali.By the Pope whiskers! went on a sham soldier, who had once been inservice, here are church gutters spitting melted lead at you betterthan the machicolations of Lectoure.Do you see that demon passing and repassing in front of the fire? exclaimed the Duke of Egypt.Pardieu, tis that damned bellringer, tis Quasimodo, said Clopin.The Bohemian tossed his head. I tell you, that tis the spirit Sabnac,the grand marquis, the demon of fortifications. He has the form of anarmed soldier, the head of a lion. Sometimes he rides a hideous horse.He changes men into stones, of which he builds towers. He commandsfifty legions Tis he indeed; I recognize him. Sometimes he is clad in ahandsome golden robe, figured after the Turkish fashion.Where is Bellevigne de l’Etoile? demanded Clopin.He is dead.Andry the Red laughed in an idiotic way: NotreDame is making work forthe hospital, said he.Is there, then, no way of forcing this door, exclaimed the King ofThunes, stamping his foot.The Duke of Egypt pointed sadly to the two streams of boiling lead whichdid not cease to streak the black facade, like two long distaffs ofphosphorus.Churches have been known to defend themselves thus all by themselves, he remarked with a sigh. SaintSophia at Constantinople, forty yearsago, hurled to the earth three times in succession, the crescent ofMahom, by shaking her domes, which are her heads. Guillaume de Paris,who built this one was a magician.Must we then retreat in pitiful fashion, like highwaymen? said Clopin.Must we leave our sister here, whom those hooded wolves will hangtomorrow.And the sacristy, where there are wagonloads of gold! added avagabond, whose name, we regret to say, we do not know.Beard of Mahom! cried Trouillefou.Let us make another trial, resumed the vagabond.Mathias Hungadi shook his head.We shall never get in by the door. We must find the defect in the armorof the old fairy; a hole, a false postern, some joint or other.Who will go with me? said Clopin. I shall go at it again. By the way,where is the little scholar Jehan, who is so encased in iron?He is dead, no doubt, some one replied; we no longer hear his laugh.The King of Thunes frowned: So much the worse. There was a brave heartunder that ironmongery. And Master Pierre Gringoire?Captain Clopin, said Andry the Red, he slipped away before we reachedthe PontauxChangeurs.Clopin stamped his foot. GueuleDieu! twas he who pushed us onhither, and he has deserted us in the very middle of the job! Cowardlychatterer, with a slipper for a helmet!Captain Clopin, said Andry the Red, who was gazing down Rue du Parvis,yonder is the little scholar.Praised be Pluto! said Clopin. But what the devil is he draggingafter him?It was, in fact, Jehan, who was running as fast as his heavy outfit of aPaladin, and a long ladder which trailed on the pavement, would permit,more breathless than an ant harnessed to a blade of grass twenty timeslonger than itself.Victory! _Te Deum_! cried the scholar. Here is the ladder of thelongshoremen of Port SaintLandry.Clopin approached him.Child, what do you mean to do, _cornedieu_! with this ladder?I have it, replied Jehan, panting. I knew where it was under the shedof the lieutenant house. There a wench there whom I know, who thinksme as handsome as Cupido. I made use of her to get the ladder, and Ihave the ladder, _PasqueMahom_! The poor girl came to open the door tome in her shift.Yes, said Clopin, but what are you going to do with that ladder?Jehan gazed at him with a malicious, knowing look, and cracked hisfingers like castanets. At that moment he was sublime. On his head hewore one of those overloaded helmets of the fifteenth century, whichfrightened the enemy with their fanciful crests. His bristled with teniron beaks, so that Jehan could have disputed with Nestor Homericvessel the redoubtable title of _dexeubolos_.What do I mean to do with it, august king of Thunes? Do you see thatrow of statues which have such idiotic expressions, yonder, above thethree portals?Yes. Well?Tis the gallery of the kings of France.What is that to me? said Clopin.Wait! At the end of that gallery there is a door which is neverfastened otherwise than with a latch, and with this ladder I ascend, andI am in the church.Child let me be the first to ascend.No, comrade, the ladder is mine. Come, you shall be the second.May Beelzebub strangle you! said surly Clopin, I won’t be second toanybody.Then find a ladder, Clopin!Jehan set out on a run across the Place, dragging his ladder andshouting: Follow me, lads!In an instant the ladder was raised, and propped against the balustradeof the lower gallery, above one of the lateral doors. The throng ofvagabonds, uttering loud acclamations, crowded to its foot to ascend.But Jehan maintained his right, and was the first to set foot on therungs. The passage was tolerably long. The gallery of the kings ofFrance is today about sixty feet above the pavement. The eleven stepsof the flight before the door, made it still higher. Jehan mountedslowly, a good deal incommoded by his heavy armor, holding his crossbowin one hand, and clinging to a rung with the other. When he reachedthe middle of the ladder, he cast a melancholy glance at the poor deadoutcasts, with which the steps were strewn. Alas! said he, here is aheap of bodies worthy of the fifth book of the Iliad! Then he continuedhis ascent. The vagabonds followed him. There was one on every rung.At the sight of this line of cuirassed backs, undulating as they rosethrough the gloom, one would have pronounced it a serpent with steelscales, which was raising itself erect in front of the church. Jehan whoformed the head, and who was whistling, completed the illusion.The scholar finally reached the balcony of the gallery, and climbed overit nimbly, to the applause of the whole vagabond tribe. Thus master ofthe citadel, he uttered a shout of joy, and suddenly halted, petrified.He had just caught sight of Quasimodo concealed in the dark, withflashing eye, behind one of the statues of the kings.Before a second assailant could gain a foothold on the gallery, theformidable hunchback leaped to the head of the ladder, without utteringa word, seized the ends of the two uprights with his powerful hands,raised them, pushed them out from the wall, balanced the long and pliantladder, loaded with vagabonds from top to bottom for a moment, in themidst of shrieks of anguish, then suddenly, with superhuman force,hurled this cluster of men backward into the Place. There was a momentwhen even the most resolute trembled. The ladder, launched backwards,remained erect and standing for an instant, and seemed to hesitate, thenwavered, then suddenly, describing a frightful arc of a circle eightyfeet in radius, crashed upon the pavement with its load of ruffians,more rapidly than a drawbridge when its chains break. There arose animmense imprecation, then all was still, and a few mutilated wretcheswere seen, crawling over the heap of dead.A sound of wrath and grief followed the first cries of triumph amongthe besiegers. Quasimodo, impassive, with both elbows propped on thebalustrade, looked on. He had the air of an old, bushyheaded king athis window.As for Jehan Frollo, he was in a critical position. He found himself inthe gallery with the formidable bellringer, alone, separated from hiscompanions by a vertical wall eighty feet high. While Quasimodo wasdealing with the ladder, the scholar had run to the postern which hebelieved to be open. It was not. The deaf man had closed it behind himwhen he entered the gallery. Jehan had then concealed himself behinda stone king, not daring to breathe, and fixing upon the monstroushunchback a frightened gaze, like the man, who, when courting the wifeof the guardian of a menagerie, went one evening to a love rendezvous,mistook the wall which he was to climb, and suddenly found himself faceto face with a white bear.For the first few moments, the deaf man paid no heed to him; but at lasthe turned his head, and suddenly straightened up. He had just caughtsight of the scholar.Jehan prepared himself for a rough shock, but the deaf man remainedmotionless; only he had turned towards the scholar and was looking athim.Ho ho! said Jehan, what do you mean by staring at me with thatsolitary and melancholy eye?As he spoke thus, the young scamp stealthily adjusted his crossbow.Quasimodo! he cried, I am going to change your surname: you shall becalled the blind man.The shot sped. The feathered vireton whizzed and entered thehunchback left arm. Quasimodo appeared no more moved by it than by ascratch to King Pharamond. He laid his hand on the arrow, tore it fromhis arm, and tranquilly broke it across his big knee; then he let thetwo pieces drop on the floor, rather than threw them down. But Jehanhad no opportunity to fire a second time. The arrow broken, Quasimodobreathing heavily, bounded like a grasshopper, and he fell upon thescholar, whose armor was flattened against the wall by the blow.    An arrow with a pyramidal head of iron and copper spiral wings bywhich a rotatory motion was communicated.Then in that gloom, wherein wavered the light of the torches, a terriblething was seen.Quasimodo had grasped with his left hand the two arms of Jehan, who didnot offer any resistance, so thoroughly did he feel that he was lost.With his right hand, the deaf man detached one by one, in silence, withsinister slowness, all the pieces of his armor, the sword, the daggers,the helmet, the cuirass, the leg pieces. One would have said that it wasa monkey taking the shell from a nut. Quasimodo flung the scholariron shell at his feet, piece by piece. When the scholar beheld himselfdisarmed, stripped, weak, and naked in those terrible hands, he made noattempt to speak to the deaf man, but began to laugh audaciously in hisface, and to sing with his intrepid heedlessness of a child of sixteen,the then popular ditty:     _Elle est bien habillée,     La ville de Cambrai;     Marafin l’a pillée_...    The city of Cambrai is well dressed. Marafin plundered it.He did not finish. Quasimodo was seen on the parapet of the gallery,holding the scholar by the feet with one hand and whirling him overthe abyss like a sling; then a sound like that of a bony structure incontact with a wall was heard, and something was seen to fall whichhalted a third of the way down in its fall, on a projection in thearchitecture. It was a dead body which remained hanging there, bentdouble, its loins broken, its skull empty.A cry of horror rose among the vagabonds.Vengeance! shouted Clopin. To the sack! replied the multitude.Assault! assault!There came a tremendous howl, in which were mingled all tongues, alldialects, all accents. The death of the poor scholar imparted a furiousardor to that crowd. It was seized with shame, and the wrath of havingbeen held so long in check before a church by a hunchback. Rage foundladders, multiplied the torches, and, at the expiration of a fewminutes, Quasimodo, in despair, beheld that terrible ant heap mount onall sides to the assault of NotreDame. Those who had no ladders hadknotted ropes; those who had no ropes climbed by the projections ofthe carvings. They hung from each other rags. There were no means ofresisting that rising tide of frightful faces; rage made these fiercecountenances ruddy; their clayey brows were dripping with sweat; theireyes darted lightnings; all these grimaces, all these horrors laid siegeto Quasimodo. One would have said that some other church had despatchedto the assault of NotreDame its gorgons, its dogs, its drées, itsdemons, its most fantastic sculptures. It was like a layer of livingmonsters on the stone monsters of the façade.Meanwhile, the Place was studded with a thousand torches. This scene ofconfusion, till now hid in darkness, was suddenly flooded with light.The parvis was resplendent, and cast a radiance on the sky; the bonfirelighted on the lofty platform was still burning, and illuminated thecity far away. The enormous silhouette of the two towers, projected afaron the roofs of Paris, and formed a large notch of black in this light.The city seemed to be aroused. Alarm bells wailed in the distance.The vagabonds howled, panted, swore, climbed; and Quasimodo, powerlessagainst so many enemies, shuddering for the gypsy, beholding the furiousfaces approaching ever nearer and nearer to his gallery, entreatedheaven for a miracle, and wrung his arms in despair.CHAPTER V. THE RETREAT IN WHICH MONSIEUR LOUIS OF FRANCE SAYS HISPRAYERS.The reader has not, perhaps, forgotten that one moment before catchingsight of the nocturnal band of vagabonds, Quasimodo, as he inspectedParis from the heights of his bell tower, perceived only one lightburning, which gleamed like a star from a window on the topmost storyof a lofty edifice beside the Porte SaintAntoine. This edifice was theBastille. That star was the candle of Louis XI. King Louis XI. had, infact, been two days in Paris. He was to take his departure on the nextday but one for his citadel of MontilzlesTours. He made but seldom andbrief appearance in his good city of Paris, since there he did not feelabout him enough pitfalls, gibbets, and Scotch archers.He had come, that day, to sleep at the Bastille. The great chamber fivetoises square, which he had at the Louvre, with its huge chimneypieceloaded with twelve great beasts and thirteen great prophets, and hisgrand bed, eleven feet by twelve, pleased him but little. He felthimself lost amid all this grandeur. This good bourgeois king preferredthe Bastille with a tiny chamber and couch. And then, the Bastille wasstronger than the Louvre.    An ancient long measure in France, containing six feetand nearly five inches English measure.This little chamber, which the king reserved for himself in the famousstate prison, was also tolerably spacious and occupied the topmoststory of a turret rising from the donjon keep. It was circular in form,carpeted with mats of shining straw, ceiled with beams, enriched withfleursdelis of gilded metal with interjoists in color; wainscoatedwith rich woods sown with rosettes of white metal, and with otherspainted a fine, bright green, made of orpiment and fine indigo.There was only one window, a long pointed casement, latticed with brasswire and bars of iron, further darkened by fine colored panes with thearms of the king and of the queen, each pane being worth two and twentysols.There was but one entrance, a modern door, with a fiat arch, garnishedwith a piece of tapestry on the inside, and on the outside by one ofthose porches of Irish wood, frail edifices of cabinetwork curiouslywrought, numbers of which were still to be seen in old houses a hundredand fifty years ago. Although they disfigure and embarrass the places, says Sauvel in despair, our old people are still unwilling to get ridof them, and keep them in spite of everybody.In this chamber, nothing was to be found of what furnishes ordinaryapartments, neither benches, nor trestles, nor forms, nor commonstools in the form of a chest, nor fine stools sustained by pillars andcounterpillars, at four sols a piece. Only one easy armchair, verymagnificent, was to be seen; the wood was painted with roses on a redground, the seat was of ruby Cordovan leather, ornamented with longsilken fringes, and studded with a thousand golden nails. The lonelinessof this chair made it apparent that only one person had a right to sitdown in this apartment. Beside the chair, and quite close to the window,there was a table covered with a cloth with a pattern of birds. On thistable stood an inkhorn spotted with ink, some parchments, several pens,and a large goblet of chased silver. A little further on was a brazier,a praying stool in crimson velvet, relieved with small bosses of gold.Finally, at the extreme end of the room, a simple bed of scarlet andyellow damask, without either tinsel or lace; having only an ordinaryfringe. This bed, famous for having borne the sleep or the sleeplessnessof Louis XI., was still to be seen two hundred years ago, at thehouse of a councillor of state, where it was seen by old Madame Pilou,celebrated in _Cyrus_ under the name Arricidie and of la MoraleVivante.Such was the chamber which was called the retreat where Monsieur Louisde France says his prayers.At the moment when we have introduced the reader into it, this retreatwas very dark. The curfew bell had sounded an hour before; night wascome, and there was only one flickering wax candle set on the table tolight five persons variously grouped in the chamber.The first on which the light fell was a seigneur superbly clad inbreeches and jerkin of scarlet striped with silver, and a loose coatwith half sleeves of cloth of gold with black figures. This splendidcostume, on which the light played, seemed glazed with flame on everyfold. The man who wore it had his armorial bearings embroidered on hisbreast in vivid colors; a chevron accompanied by a deer passant. Theshield was flanked, on the right by an olive branch, on the left by adeer antlers. This man wore in his girdle a rich dagger whose hilt,of silver gilt, was chased in the form of a helmet, and surmounted by acount coronet. He had a forbidding air, a proud mien, and a headheld high. At the first glance one read arrogance on his visage; at thesecond, craft.He was standing bareheaded, a long roll of parchment in his hand, behindthe armchair in which was seated, his body ungracefully doubled up, hisknees crossed, his elbow on the table, a very badly accoutred personage.Let the reader imagine in fact, on the rich seat of Cordova leather, twocrooked knees, two thin thighs, poorly clad in black worsted tricot, abody enveloped in a cloak of fustian, with fur trimming of which moreleather than hair was visible; lastly, to crown all, a greasy old hat ofthe worst sort of black cloth, bordered with a circular string of leadenfigures. This, in company with a dirty skullcap, which hardly allowed ahair to escape, was all that distinguished the seated personage. He heldhis head so bent upon his breast, that nothing was to be seen of hisface thus thrown into shadow, except the tip of his nose, upon whichfell a ray of light, and which must have been long. From the thinness ofhis wrinkled hand, one divined that he was an old man. It was Louis XI.At some distance behind them, two men dressed in garments of Flemishstyle were conversing, who were not sufficiently lost in the shadow toprevent any one who had been present at the performance of Gringoiremystery from recognizing in them two of the principal Flemish envoys,Guillaume Rym, the sagacious pensioner of Ghent, and Jacques Coppenole,the popular hosier. The reader will remember that these men were mixedup in the secret politics of Louis XI. Finally, quite at the end ofthe room, near the door, in the dark, stood, motionless as a statue, avigorous man with thickset limbs, a military harness, with a surcoatof armorial bearings, whose square face pierced with staring eyes, slitwith an immense mouth, his ears concealed by two large screens of flathair, had something about it both of the dog and the tiger.All were uncovered except the king.The gentleman who stood near the king was reading him a sort of longmemorial to which his majesty seemed to be listening attentively. Thetwo Flemings were whispering together.Cross of God! grumbled Coppenole, I am tired of standing; is there nochair here?Rym replied by a negative gesture, accompanied by a discreet smile.CroixDieu! resumed Coppenole, thoroughly unhappy at being obliged tolower his voice thus, I should like to sit down on the floor, with mylegs crossed, like a hosier, as I do in my shop.Take good care that you do not, Master Jacques.Ouais! Master Guillaume! can one only remain here on his feet?Or on his knees, said Rym.At that moment the king voice was uplifted. They held their peace.Fifty sols for the robes of our valets, and twelve livres for themantles of the clerks of our crown! That it! Pour out gold by the ton!Are you mad, Olivier?As he spoke thus, the old man raised his head. The golden shells of thecollar of SaintMichael could be seen gleaming on his neck. The candlefully illuminated his gaunt and morose profile. He tore the papers fromthe other hand.You are ruining us! he cried, casting his hollow eyes over the scroll.What is all this? What need have we of so prodigious a household? Twochaplains at ten livres a month each, and, a chapel clerk at one hundredsols! A valetdechambre at ninety livres a year. Four head cooks atsix score livres a year each! A spitcook, an herbcook, a saucecook,a butler, two sumpterhorse lackeys, at ten livres a month each! Twoscullions at eight livres! A groom of the stables and his two aids atfour and twenty livres a month! A porter, a pastrycook, a baker, twocarters, each sixty livres a year! And the farrier six score livres! Andthe master of the chamber of our funds, twelve hundred livres! And thecomptroller five hundred. And how do I know what else? Tis ruinous. Thewages of our servants are putting France to the pillage! All the ingotsof the Louvre will melt before such a fire of expenses! We shall have tosell our plate! And next year, if God and our Lady (here he raised hishat) lend us life, we shall drink our potions from a pewter pot!So saying, he cast a glance at the silver goblet which gleamed upon thetable. He coughed and continued,Master Olivier, the princes who reign over great lordships, like kingsand emperors, should not allow sumptuousness in their houses; forthe fire spreads thence through the province. Hence, Master Olivier,consider this said once for all. Our expenditure increases every year.The thing displease us. How, _pasqueDieu_! when in 79 it did notexceed six and thirty thousand livres, did it attain in 80, fortythreethousand six hundred and nineteen livres? I have the figures in my head.In 81, sixtysix thousand six hundred and eighty livres, and this year,by the faith of my body, it will reach eighty thousand livres! Doubledin four years! Monstrous!He paused breathless, then resumed energetically,I behold around me only people who fatten on my leanness! you suckcrowns from me at every pore.All remained silent. This was one of those fits of wrath which areallowed to take their course. He continued,Tis like that request in Latin from the gentlemen of France, thatwe should reestablish what they call the grand charges of the Crown!Charges in very deed! Charges which crush! Ah! gentlemen! you say thatwe are not a king to reign _dapifero nullo, buticulario nullo_! We willlet you see, _pasqueDieu_! whether we are not a king!Here he smiled, in the consciousness of his power; this softened his badhumor, and he turned towards the Flemings,Do you see, Gossip Guillaume? the grand warden of the keys, the grandbutler, the grand chamberlain, the grand seneschal are not worth thesmallest valet. Remember this, Gossip Coppenole. They serve no purpose,as they stand thus useless round the king; they produce upon me theeffect of the four Evangelists who surround the face of the big clock ofthe palace, and which Philippe Brille has just set in order afresh. Theyare gilt, but they do not indicate the hour; and the hands can get onwithout them.He remained in thought for a moment, then added, shaking his agedhead,Ho! ho! by our Lady, I am not Philippe Brille, and I shall not gild thegreat vassals anew. Continue, Olivier.The person whom he designated by this name, took the papers into hishands again, and began to read aloud,To Adam Tenon, clerk of the warden of the seals of the provostship ofParis; for the silver, making, and engraving of said seals, which havebeen made new because the others preceding, by reason of their antiquityand their worn condition, could no longer be successfully used, twelvelivres parisis.To Guillaume Frère, the sum of four livres, four sols parisis, for histrouble and salary, for having nourished and fed the doves in the twodovecots of the Hôtel des Tournelles, during the months of January,February, and March of this year; and for this he hath given sevensextiers of barley.To a gray friar for confessing a criminal, four sols parisis.The king listened in silence. From time to time he coughed; then heraised the goblet to his lips and drank a draught with a grimace.During this year there have been made by the ordinance of justice,to the sound of the trumpet, through the squares of Paris, fiftysixproclamations. Account to be regulated.For having searched and ransacked in certain places, in Paris as wellas elsewhere, for money said to be there concealed; but nothing hathbeen found: fortyfive livres parisis.Bury a crown to unearth a sou! said the king.For having set in the Hôtel des Tournelles six panes of white glassin the place where the iron cage is, thirteen sols; for having madeand delivered by command of the king, on the day of the musters, fourshields with the escutcheons of the said seigneur, encircled withgarlands of roses all about, six livres; for two new sleeves to theking old doublet, twenty sols; for a box of grease to grease the bootsof the king, fifteen deniers; a stable newly made to lodge the kingblack pigs, thirty livres parisis; many partitions, planks, andtrapdoors, for the safekeeping of the lions at SaintPaul, twentytwolivres.These be dear beasts, said Louis XI. It matters not; it is a finemagnificence in a king. There is a great red lion whom I love for hispleasant ways. Have you seen him, Master Guillaume? Princes must havethese terrific animals; for we kings must have lions for our dogs andtigers for our cats. The great befits a crown. In the days of the pagansof Jupiter, when the people offered the temples a hundred oxen and ahundred sheep, the emperors gave a hundred lions and a hundred eagles.This was wild and very fine. The kings of France have always hadroarings round their throne. Nevertheless, people must do me thisjustice, that I spend still less money on it than they did, and that Ipossess a greater modesty of lions, bears, elephants, and leopards.Goon, Master Olivier. We wished to say thus much to our Flemish friends.Guillaume Rym bowed low, while Coppenole, with his surly mien, had theair of one of the bears of which his majesty was speaking. The king paidno heed. He had just dipped his lips into the goblet, and he spat outthe beverage, saying: Foh! what a disagreeable potion! The man who wasreading continued:For feeding a rascally footpad, locked up these six months in thelittle cell of the flayer, until it should be determined what to do withhim, six livres, four sols.What that? interrupted the king; feed what ought to be hanged!_PasqueDieu_! I will give not a sou more for that nourishment. Olivier,come to an understanding about the matter with Monsieur d’Estouteville,and prepare me this very evening the wedding of the gallant and thegallows. Resume.Olivier made a mark with his thumb against the article of the rascallyfoot soldier, and passed on.To Henriet Cousin, master executor of the high works of justice inParis, the sum of sixty sols parisis, to him assessed and ordained bymonseigneur the provost of Paris, for having bought, by order of thesaid sieur the provost, a great broad sword, serving to execute anddecapitate persons who are by justice condemned for their demerits,and he hath caused the same to be garnished with a sheath and with allthings thereto appertaining; and hath likewise caused to be repointedand set in order the old sword, which had become broken and notched inexecuting justice on Messire Louis de Luxembourg, as will more fullyappear.The king interrupted: That suffices. I allow the sum with great goodwill. Those are expenses which I do not begrudge. I have never regrettedthat money. Continue.For having made over a great cage...Ah! said the king, grasping the arms of his chair in both hands, Iknew well that I came hither to this Bastille for some purpose. Hold,Master Olivier; I desire to see that cage myself. You shall read me thecost while I am examining it. Messieurs Flemings, come and see this;tis curious.Then he rose, leaned on the arm of his interlocutor, made a sign tothe sort of mute who stood before the door to precede him, to the twoFlemings to follow him, and quitted the room.The royal company was recruited, at the door of the retreat, by men ofarms, all loaded down with iron, and by slender pages bearing flambeaux.It marched for some time through the interior of the gloomy donjon,pierced with staircases and corridors even in the very thickness of thewalls. The captain of the Bastille marched at their head, and caused thewickets to be opened before the bent and aged king, who coughed as hewalked.At each wicket, all heads were obliged to stoop, except that of the oldman bent double with age. Hum, said he between his gums, for he hadno longer any teeth, we are already quite prepared for the door of thesepulchre. For a low door, a bent passer.At length, after having passed a final wicket, so loaded with locks thata quarter of an hour was required to open it, they entered a vast andlofty vaulted hall, in the centre of which they could distinguish by thelight of the torches, a huge cubic mass of masonry, iron, and wood. Theinterior was hollow. It was one of those famous cages of prisoners ofstate, which were called the little daughters of the king. In itswalls there were two or three little windows so closely trellised withstout iron bars; that the glass was not visible. The door was a largeflat slab of stone, as on tombs; the sort of door which serves forentrance only. Only here, the occupant was alive.The king began to walk slowly round the little edifice, examining itcarefully, while Master Olivier, who followed him, read aloud the note.For having made a great cage of wood of solid beams, timbers andwallplates, measuring nine feet in length by eight in breadth, and ofthe height of seven feet between the partitions, smoothed and clampedwith great bolts of iron, which has been placed in a chamber situated inone of the towers of the Bastille SaintAntoine, in which cage is placedand detained, by command of the king our lord, a prisoner who formerlyinhabited an old, decrepit, and ruined cage. There have been employedin making the said new cage, ninetysix horizontal beams, and fiftytwoupright joists, ten wall plates three toises long; there have beenoccupied nineteen carpenters to hew, work, and fit all the said wood inthe courtyard of the Bastille during twenty days.Very fine heart of oak, said the king, striking the woodwork with hisfist.There have been used in this cage, continued the other, two hundredand twenty great bolts of iron, of nine feet, and of eight, the rest ofmedium length, with the rowels, caps and counterbands appertaining tothe said bolts; weighing, the said iron in all, three thousand, sevenhundred and thirtyfive pounds; beside eight great squares of iron,serving to attach the said cage in place with clamps and nails weighingin all two hundred and eighteen pounds, not reckoning the iron of thetrellises for the windows of the chamber wherein the cage hath beenplaced, the bars of iron for the door of the cage and other things.Tis a great deal of iron, said the king, to contain the light of aspirit.The whole amounts to three hundred and seventeen livres, five sols,seven deniers._PasqueDieu_! exclaimed the king.At this oath, which was the favorite of Louis XI., some one seemedto awaken in the interior of the cage; the sound of chains was heard,grating on the floor, and a feeble voice, which seemed to issue from thetomb was uplifted. Sire! sire! mercy! The one who spoke thus could notbe seen.Three hundred and seventeen livres, five sols, seven deniers, repeatedLouis XI. The lamentable voice which had proceeded from the cage hadfrozen all present, even Master Olivier himself. The king alone worethe air of not having heard. At his order, Master Olivier resumed hisreading, and his majesty coldly continued his inspection of the cage.In addition to this there hath been paid to a mason who hath made theholes wherein to place the gratings of the windows, and the floor ofthe chamber where the cage is, because that floor could not supportthis cage by reason of its weight, twentyseven livres fourteen solsparisis.The voice began to moan again.Mercy, sire! I swear to you that twas Monsieur the Cardinal d’Angersand not I, who was guilty of treason.The mason is bold! said the king. Continue, Olivier. Oliviercontinued,To a joiner for window frames, bedstead, hollow stool, and otherthings, twenty livres, two sols parisis.The voice also continued.Alas, sire! will you not listen to me? I protest to you that twasnot I who wrote the matter to Monseigneur do Guyenne, but Monsieur leCardinal Balue.The joiner is dear, quoth the king. Is that all?No, sire. To a glazier, for the windows of the said chamber, fortysixsols, eight deniers parisis.Have mercy, sire! Is it not enough to have given all my goods to myjudges, my plate to Monsieur de Torcy, my library to Master PierreDoriolle, my tapestry to the governor of the Roussillon? I am innocent.I have been shivering in an iron cage for fourteen years. Have mercy,sire! You will find your reward in heaven.Master Olivier, said the king, the total?Three hundred sixtyseven livres, eight sols, three deniers parisis.NotreDame! cried the king. This is an outrageous cage!He tore the book from Master Olivier hands, and set to reckoning ithimself upon his fingers, examining the paper and the cage alternately.Meanwhile, the prisoner could be heard sobbing. This was lugubrious inthe darkness, and their faces turned pale as they looked at each other.Fourteen years, sire! Fourteen years now! since the month of April,1469. In the name of the Holy Mother of God, sire, listen to me! Duringall this time you have enjoyed the heat of the sun. Shall I, frailcreature, never more behold the day? Mercy, sire! Be pitiful! Clemencyis a fine, royal virtue, which turns aside the currents of wrath. Doesyour majesty believe that in the hour of death it will be a greatcause of content for a king never to have left any offence unpunished?Besides, sire, I did not betray your majesty, twas Monsieur d’Angers;and I have on my foot a very heavy chain, and a great ball of iron atthe end, much heavier than it should be in reason. Eh! sire! Have pityon me!Olivier, cried the king, throwing back his head, I observe that theycharge me twenty sols a hogshead for plaster, while it is worth buttwelve. You will refer back this account.He turned his back on the cage, and set out to leave the room. Themiserable prisoner divined from the removal of the torches and thenoise, that the king was taking his departure.Sire! sire! he cried in despair.The door closed again. He no longer saw anything, and heard only thehoarse voice of the turnkey, singing in his ears this ditty,     _Maître Jean Balue,     A perdu la vue     De ses évêchés.     Monsieur de Verdun.     N’en a plus pas un;     Tous sont dépêchés_.    Master Jean Balue has lost sight of his bishoprics.Monsieur of Verdun has no longer one; all have been killed off.The king reascended in silence to his retreat, and his suite followedhim, terrified by the last groans of the condemned man. All at once hismajesty turned to the Governor of the Bastille,By the way, said he, was there not some one in that cage?Pardieu, yes sire! replied the governor, astounded by the question.And who was it?Monsieur the Bishop of Verdun.The king knew this better than any one else. But it was a mania of his.Ah! said he, with the innocent air of thinking of it for the firsttime, Guillaume de Harancourt, the friend of Monsieur the CardinalBalue. A good devil of a bishop!At the expiration of a few moments, the door of the retreat had openedagain, then closed upon the five personages whom the reader has seenat the beginning of this chapter, and who resumed their places, theirwhispered conversations, and their attitudes.During the king absence, several despatches had been placed on histable, and he broke the seals himself. Then he began to read thempromptly, one after the other, made a sign to Master Olivier whoappeared to exercise the office of minister, to take a pen, and withoutcommunicating to him the contents of the despatches, he began to dictatein a low voice, the replies which the latter wrote, on his knees, in aninconvenient attitude before the table.Guillaume Rym was on the watch.The king spoke so low that the Flemings heard nothing of his dictation,except some isolated and rather unintelligible scraps, such as,To maintain the fertile places by commerce, and the sterile bymanufactures....To show the English lords our four bombards, London,Brabant, BourgenBresse, SaintOmer....Artillery is the cause ofwar being made more judiciously now....To Monsieur de Bressuire, ourfriend....Armies cannot be maintained without tribute, etc.Once he raised his voice,_Pasque Dieu_! Monsieur the King of Sicily seals his letters withyellow wax, like a king of France. Perhaps we are in the wrong to permithim so to do. My fair cousin of Burgundy granted no armorial bearingswith a field of gules. The grandeur of houses is assured by theintegrity of prerogatives. Note this, friend Olivier.Again,Oh! oh! said he, What a long message! What doth our brother theemperor claim? And running his eye over the missive and breakinghis reading with interjection: Surely! the Germans are so great andpowerful, that it is hardly credibleBut let us not forget the oldproverb: The finest county is Flanders; the finest duchy, Milan; thefinest kingdom, France.’ Is it not so, Messieurs Flemings?This time Coppenole bowed in company with Guillaume Rym. The hosierpatriotism was tickled.The last despatch made Louis XI. frown.What is this? he said, Complaints and fault finding against ourgarrisons in Picardy! Olivier, write with diligence to M. the Marshalde Rouault:That discipline is relaxed. That the gendarmes of theunattached troops, the feudal nobles, the free archers, and the Swissinflict infinite evils on the rustics.That the military, not contentwith what they find in the houses of the rustics, constrain them withviolent blows of cudgel or of lash to go and get wine, spices, and otherunreasonable things in the town.That monsieur the king knows this.That we undertake to guard our people against inconveniences, larceniesand pillage.That such is our will, by our Lady!That in addition, itsuits us not that any fiddler, barber, or any soldier varlet should beclad like a prince, in velvet, cloth of silk, and rings of gold.Thatthese vanities are hateful to God.That we, who are gentlemen,content ourselves with a doublet of cloth at sixteen sols the ell, ofParis.That messieurs the campfollowers can very well come downto that, also.Command and ordain.To Monsieur de Rouault, ourfriend.Good.He dictated this letter aloud, in a firm tone, and in jerks. At themoment when he finished it, the door opened and gave passage to anew personage, who precipitated himself into the chamber, crying inaffright,Sire! sire! there is a sedition of the populace in Paris! Louis XI.grave face contracted; but all that was visible of his emotion passedaway like a flash of lightning. He controlled himself and said withtranquil severity,Gossip Jacques, you enter very abruptly!Sire! sire! there is a revolt! repeated Gossip Jacques breathlessly.The king, who had risen, grasped him roughly by the arm, and said inhis ear, in such a manner as to be heard by him alone, with concentratedrage and a sidelong glance at the Flemings,Hold your tongue! or speak low!The new comer understood, and began in a low tone to give a veryterrified account, to which the king listened calmly, while GuillaumeRym called Coppenole attention to the face and dress of the newarrival, to his furred cowl, (_caputia fourrata_), his short cape,(_epitogia curta_), his robe of black velvet, which bespoke a presidentof the court of accounts.Hardly had this personage given the king some explanations, when LouisXI. exclaimed, bursting into a laugh,In truth? Speak aloud, Gossip Coictier! What call is there for youto talk so low? Our Lady knoweth that we conceal nothing from our goodfriends the Flemings.But sire...Speak loud!Gossip Coictier was struck dumb with surprise.So, resumed the king,speak sir,there is a commotion among thelouts in our good city of Paris?Yes, sire.And which is moving you say, against monsieur the bailiff of thePalaisdeJustice?So it appears, said the gossip, who still stammered, utterly astoundedby the abrupt and inexplicable change which had just taken place in theking thoughts.Louis XI. continued: Where did the watch meet the rabble?Marching from the Grand Truanderie, towards the PontauxChangeurs. Imet it myself as I was on my way hither to obey your majesty commands.I heard some of them shouting: Down with the bailiff of the palace!’And what complaints have they against the bailiff?Ah! said Gossip Jacques, because he is their lord.Really?Yes, sire. They are knaves from the CourdesMiracles. They have beencomplaining this long while, of the bailiff, whose vassals they are.They do not wish to recognize him either as judge or as voyer?    One in charge of the highways.Yes, certainly! retorted the king with a smile of satisfaction whichhe strove in vain to disguise.In all their petitions to the Parliament, they claim to have but twomasters. Your majesty and their God, who is the devil, I believe.Eh! eh! said the king.He rubbed his hands, he laughed with that inward mirth which makes thecountenance beam; he was unable to dissimulate his joy, although heendeavored at moments to compose himself. No one understood it in theleast, not even Master Olivier. He remained silent for a moment, with athoughtful but contented air.Are they in force? he suddenly inquired.Yes, assuredly, sire, replied Gossip Jacques.How many?Six thousand at the least.The king could not refrain from saying: Good! he went on,Are they armed?With scythes, pikes, hackbuts, pickaxes. All sorts of very violentweapons.The king did not appear in the least disturbed by this list. Jacquesconsidered it his duty to add,If your majesty does not send prompt succor to the bailiff, he islost.We will send, said the king with an air of false seriousness. It iswell. Assuredly we will send. Monsieur the bailiff is our friend. Sixthousand! They are desperate scamps! Their audacity is marvellous, andwe are greatly enraged at it. But we have only a few people about ustonight. Tomorrow morning will be time enough.Gossip Jacques exclaimed, Instantly, sire! there will be time to sackthe bailiwick a score of times, to violate the seignory, to hang thebailiff. For God sake, sire! send before tomorrow morning.The king looked him full in the face. I have told you tomorrowmorning.It was one Of those looks to which one does not reply. After a silence,Louis XI. raised his voice once more,You should know that, Gossip Jacques. What wasHe corrected himself. What is the bailiff feudal jurisdiction?Sire, the bailiff of the palace has the Rue Calendre as far as the Ruede l’Herberie, the Place SaintMichel, and the localities vulgarly knownas the Mureaux, situated near the church of NotreDame des Champs (hereLouis XI. raised the brim of his hat), which hotels number thirteen,plus the Cour des Miracles, plus the Maladerie, called the Banlieue,plus the whole highway which begins at that Maladerie and ends at thePorte SainteJacques. Of these divers places he is voyer, high, middle,and low, justiciary, full seigneur.Bless me! said the king, scratching his left ear with his right hand,that makes a goodly bit of my city! Ah! monsieur the bailiff was kingof all that.This time he did not correct himself. He continued dreamily, and asthough speaking to himself,Very fine, monsieur the bailiff! You had there between your teeth apretty slice of our Paris.All at once he broke out explosively, _PasqueDieu_! What people arethose who claim to be voyers, justiciaries, lords and masters in ourdomains? who have their tollgates at the end of every field? theirgallows and their hangman at every crossroad among our people? So thatas the Greek believed that he had as many gods as there were fountains,and the Persian as many as he beheld stars, the Frenchman counts as manykings as he sees gibbets! Pardieu! tis an evil thing, and the confusionof it displeases me. I should greatly like to know whether it be themercy of God that there should be in Paris any other lord than the king,any other judge than our parliament, any other emperor than ourselves inthis empire! By the faith of my soul! the day must certainly come whenthere shall exist in France but one king, one lord, one judge, oneheadsman, as there is in paradise but one God!He lifted his cap again, and continued, still dreamily, with the airand accent of a hunter who is cheering on his pack of hounds: Good, mypeople! bravely done! break these false lords! do your duty! at them!have at them! pillage them! take them! sack them!... Ah! you want to bekings, messeigneurs? On, my people on!Here he interrupted himself abruptly, bit his lips as though to takeback his thought which had already half escaped, bent his piercing eyesin turn on each of the five persons who surrounded him, and suddenlygrasping his hat with both hands and staring full at it, he said to it:Oh! I would burn you if you knew what there was in my head.Then casting about him once more the cautious and uneasy glance of thefox reentering his hole,No matter! we will succor monsieur the bailiff. Unfortunately, we havebut few troops here at the present moment, against so great a populace.We must wait until tomorrow. The order will be transmitted to the Cityand every one who is caught will be immediately hung.By the way, sire, said Gossip Coictier, I had forgotten that in thefirst agitation, the watch have seized two laggards of the band. If yourmajesty desires to see these men, they are here.If I desire to see them! cried the king. What! _PasqueDieu_! Youforget a thing like that! Run quick, you, Olivier! Go, seek them!Master Olivier quitted the room and returned a moment later with the twoprisoners, surrounded by archers of the guard. The first had a coarse,idiotic, drunken and astonished face. He was clothed in rags, and walkedwith one knee bent and dragging his leg. The second had a pallid andsmiling countenance, with which the reader is already acquainted.The king surveyed them for a moment without uttering a word, thenaddressing the first one abruptly,What your name?Gieffroy Pincebourde.Your trade.Outcast.What were you going to do in this damnable sedition? The outcaststared at the king, and swung his arms with a stupid air.He had one of those awkwardly shaped heads where intelligence is aboutas much at its ease as a light beneath an extinguisher.I know not, said he. They went, I went.Were you not going to outrageously attack and pillage your lord, thebailiff of the palace?I know that they were going to take something from some one. That isall.A soldier pointed out to the king a billhook which he had seized on theperson of the vagabond.Do you recognize this weapon? demanded the king.Yes; tis my billhook; I am a vinedresser.And do you recognize this man as your companion? added Louis XI.,pointing to the other prisoner.No, I do not know him.That will do, said the king, making a sign with his finger to thesilent personage who stood motionless beside the door, to whom we havealready called the reader attention.Gossip Tristan, here is a man for you.Tristan l’Hermite bowed. He gave an order in a low voice to two archers,who led away the poor vagabond.In the meantime, the king had approached the second prisoner, who wasperspiring in great drops: Your name?Sire, Pierre Gringoire.Your trade?Philosopher, sire.How do you permit yourself, knave, to go and besiege our friend,monsieur the bailiff of the palace, and what have you to say concerningthis popular agitation?Sire, I had nothing to do with it.Come, now! you wanton wretch, were not you apprehended by the watch inthat bad company?No, sire, there is a mistake. Tis a fatality. I make tragedies. Sire,I entreat your majesty to listen to me. I am a poet. Tis the melancholyway of men of my profession to roam the streets by night. I was passingthere. It was mere chance. I was unjustly arrested; I am innocentof this civil tempest. Your majesty sees that the vagabond did notrecognize me. I conjure your majestyHold your tongue! said the king, between two swallows of his ptisan.You split our head!Tristan l’Hermite advanced and pointing to Gringoire,Sire, can this one be hanged also?This was the first word that he had uttered.Phew! replied the king, I see no objection.I see a great many! said Gringoire.At that moment, our philosopher was greener than an olive. He perceivedfrom the king cold and indifferent mien that there was no otherresource than something very pathetic, and he flung himself at the feetof Louis XI., exclaiming, with gestures of despair:Sire! will your majesty deign to hear me. Sire! break not in thunderover so small a thing as myself. God great lightning doth not bombarda lettuce. Sire, you are an august and, very puissant monarch; have pityon a poor man who is honest, and who would find it more difficult tostir up a revolt than a cake of ice would to give out a spark! Verygracious sire, kindness is the virtue of a lion and a king. Alas! rigoronly frightens minds; the impetuous gusts of the north wind do not makethe traveller lay aside his cloak; the sun, bestowing his rays little bylittle, warms him in such ways that it will make him strip to his shirt.Sire, you are the sun. I protest to you, my sovereign lord and master,that I am not an outcast, thief, and disorderly fellow. Revolt andbrigandage belong not to the outfit of Apollo. I am not the man to flingmyself into those clouds which break out into seditious clamor. I amyour majesty faithful vassal. That same jealousy which a husbandcherisheth for the honor of his wife, the resentment which the son hathfor the love of his father, a good vassal should feel for the gloryof his king; he should pine away for the zeal of this house, forthe aggrandizement of his service. Every other passion which shouldtransport him would be but madness. These, sire, are my maxims of state:then do not judge me to be a seditious and thieving rascal because mygarment is worn at the elbows. If you will grant me mercy, sire, I willwear it out on the knees in praying to God for you night and morning!Alas! I am not extremely rich, tis true. I am even rather poor. Butnot vicious on that account. It is not my fault. Every one knoweth thatgreat wealth is not to be drawn from literature, and that those who arebest posted in good books do not always have a great fire in winter.The advocate trade taketh all the grain, and leaveth only straw to theother scientific professions. There are forty very excellent proverbsanent the holeridden cloak of the philosopher. Oh, sire! clemency isthe only light which can enlighten the interior of so great a soul.Clemency beareth the torch before all the other virtues. Without it theyare but blind men groping after God in the dark. Compassion, which isthe same thing as clemency, causeth the love of subjects, which is themost powerful bodyguard to a prince. What matters it to your majesty,who dazzles all faces, if there is one poor man more on earth, a poorinnocent philosopher spluttering amid the shadows of calamity, with anempty pocket which resounds against his hollow belly? Moreover, sire,I am a man of letters. Great kings make a pearl for their crowns byprotecting letters. Hercules did not disdain the title of Musagetes.Mathias Corvin favored Jean de Monroyal, the ornament of mathematics.Now, tis an ill way to protect letters to hang men of letters. What astain on Alexander if he had hung Aristoteles! This act would not be alittle patch on the face of his reputation to embellish it, but a verymalignant ulcer to disfigure it. Sire! I made a very proper epithalamiumfor Mademoiselle of Flanders and Monseigneur the very august Dauphin.That is not a firebrand of rebellion. Your majesty sees that I am nota scribbler of no reputation, that I have studied excellently well, andthat I possess much natural eloquence. Have mercy upon me, sire! In sodoing you will perform a gallant deed to our Lady, and I swear to youthat I am greatly terrified at the idea of being hanged!So saying, the unhappy Gringoire kissed the king slippers, andGuillaume Rym said to Coppenole in a low tone: He doth well to draghimself on the earth. Kings are like the Jupiter of Crete, they haveears only in their feet. And without troubling himself about theJupiter of Crete, the hosier replied with a heavy smile, and his eyesfixed on Gringoire: Oh! that it exactly! I seem to hear ChancellorHugonet craving mercy of me.When Gringoire paused at last, quite out of breath, he raised his headtremblingly towards the king, who was engaged in scratching a spot onthe knee of his breeches with his fingernail; then his majesty beganto drink from the goblet of ptisan. But he uttered not a word, and thissilence tortured Gringoire. At last the king looked at him. Here is aterrible bawler! said, he. Then, turning to Tristan l’Hermite, Bali!let him go!Gringoire fell backwards, quite thunderstruck with joy.At liberty! growled Tristan Doth not your majesty wish to have himdetained a little while in a cage?Gossip, retorted Louis XI., think you that tis for birds of thisfeather that we cause to be made cages at three hundred and sixtysevenlivres, eight sous, three deniers apiece? Release him at once,the wanton (Louis XI. was fond of this word which formed, with_PasqueDieu_, the foundation of his joviality), and put him out with abuffet.Ugh! cried Gringoire, what a great king is here!And for fear of a counter order, he rushed towards the door, whichTristan opened for him with a very bad grace. The soldiers left the roomwith him, pushing him before them with stout thwacks, which Gringoirebore like a true stoical philosopher.The king good humor since the revolt against the bailiff had beenannounced to him, made itself apparent in every way. This unwontedclemency was no small sign of it. Tristan l’Hermite in his corner worethe surly look of a dog who has had a bone snatched away from him.Meanwhile, the king thrummed gayly with his fingers on the arm of hischair, the March of PontAudemer. He was a dissembling prince, but onewho understood far better how to hide his troubles than his joys. Theseexternal manifestations of joy at any good news sometimes proceeded tovery great lengths thus, on the death, of Charles the Bold, to the pointof vowing silver balustrades to Saint Martin of Tours; on his advent tothe throne, so far as forgetting to order his father obsequies.Hé! sire! suddenly exclaimed Jacques Coictier, what has become of theacute attack of illness for which your majesty had me summoned?Oh! said the king, I really suffer greatly, my gossip. There is ahissing in my ear and fiery rakes rack my chest.Coictier took the king hand, and begun to feel of his pulse with aknowing air.Look, Coppenole, said Rym, in a low voice. Behold him betweenCoictier and Tristan. They are his whole court. A physician for himself,a headsman for others.As he felt the king pulse, Coictier assumed an air of greater andgreater alarm. Louis XI. watched him with some anxiety. Coictier grewvisibly more gloomy. The brave man had no other farm than the king badhealth. He speculated on it to the best of his ability.Oh! oh! he murmured at length, this is serious indeed.Is it not? said the king, uneasily._Pulsus creber, anhelans, crepitans, irregularis_, continued theleech._PasqueDieu_!This may carry off its man in less than three days.Our Lady! exclaimed the king. And the remedy, gossip?I am meditating upon that, sire.He made Louis XI. put out his tongue, shook his head, made a grimace,and in the very midst of these affectations,Pardieu, sire, he suddenly said, I must tell you that there isa receivership of the royal prerogatives vacant, and that I have anephew.I give the receivership to your nephew, Gossip Jacques, replied theking; but draw this fire from my breast.Since your majesty is so clement, replied the leech, you willnot refuse to aid me a little in building my house, RueSaintAndrédesArcs.Heugh! said the king.I am at the end of my finances, pursued the doctor; and it wouldreally be a pity that the house should not have a roof; not on accountof the house, which is simple and thoroughly bourgeois, but because ofthe paintings of Jehan Fourbault, which adorn its wainscoating. There isa Diana flying in the air, but so excellent, so tender, so delicate,of so ingenuous an action, her hair so well coiffed and adorned with acrescent, her flesh so white, that she leads into temptation those whoregard her too curiously. There is also a Ceres. She is another veryfair divinity. She is seated on sheaves of wheat and crowned with agallant garland of wheat ears interlaced with salsify and other flowers.Never were seen more amorous eyes, more rounded limbs, a nobler air,or a more gracefully flowing skirt. She is one of the most innocent andmost perfect beauties whom the brush has ever produced.Executioner! grumbled Louis XI., what are you driving at?I must have a roof for these paintings, sire, and, although tis but asmall matter, I have no more money.How much doth your roof cost?Why a roof of copper, embellished and gilt, two thousand livres at themost.Ah, assassin! cried the king, He never draws out one of my teethwhich is not a diamond.Am I to have my roof? said Coictier.Yes; and go to the devil, but cure me.Jacques Coictier bowed low and said,Sire, it is a repellent which will save you. We will apply to yourloins the great defensive composed of cerate, Armenian bole, white ofegg, oil, and vinegar. You will continue your ptisan and we will answerfor your majesty.A burning candle does not attract one gnat alone. Master Olivier,perceiving the king to be in a liberal mood, and judging the moment tobe propitious, approached in his turn.SireWhat is it now? said Louis XI. Sire, your majesty knoweth that SimonRadin is dead?Well?He was councillor to the king in the matter of the courts of thetreasury.Well?Sire, his place is vacant.As he spoke thus, Master Olivier haughty face quitted its arrogantexpression for a lowly one. It is the only change which ever takes placein a courtier visage. The king looked him well in the face and said ina dry tone,I understand.He resumed,Master Olivier, the Marshal de Boucicaut was wont to say, There nomaster save the king, there are no fishes save in the sea.’ I see thatyou agree with Monsieur de Boucicaut. Now listen to this; we have a goodmemory. In 68 we made you valet of our chamber: in 69, guardian of thefortress of the bridge of SaintCloud, at a hundred livres of Tournay inwages (you wanted them of Paris). In November, 73, by letters givento Gergeole, we instituted you keeper of the Wood of Vincennes, inthe place of Gilbert Acle, equerry; in 75, gruyer of the forest ofRouvraylezSaintCloud, in the place of Jacques le Maire; in 78, wegraciously settled on you, by letters patent sealed doubly with greenwax, an income of ten livres parisis, for you and your wife, on thePlace of the Merchants, situated at the School SaintGermain; in 79,we made you gruyer of the forest of Senart, in place of that poorJehan Daiz; then captain of the Château of Loches; then governor ofSaintQuentin; then captain of the bridge of Meulan, of which you causeyourself to be called comte. Out of the five sols fine paid by everybarber who shaves on a festival day, there are three sols for you andwe have the rest. We have been good enough to change your name of LeMauvais (The Evil), which resembled your face too closely. In 76, wegranted you, to the great displeasure of our nobility, armorialbearings of a thousand colors, which give you the breast of a peacock._PasqueDieu_! Are not you surfeited? Is not the draught of fishessufficiently fine and miraculous? Are you not afraid that one salmonmore will make your boat sink? Pride will be your ruin, gossip. Ruin anddisgrace always press hard on the heels of pride. Consider this and holdyour tongue.    A lord having a right on the woods of his vassals.These words, uttered with severity, made Master Olivier face revert toits insolence.Good! he muttered, almost aloud, tis easy to see that the king isill today; he giveth all to the leech.Louis XI. far from being irritated by this petulant insult, resumed withsome gentleness, Stay, I was forgetting that I made you my ambassadorto Madame Marie, at Ghent. Yes, gentlemen, added the king turning tothe Flemings, this man hath been an ambassador. There, my gossip, hepursued, addressing Master Olivier, let us not get angry; we are oldfriends. Tis very late. We have terminated our labors. Shave me.Our readers have not, without doubt, waited until the present moment torecognize in Master Olivier that terrible Figaro whom Providence, thegreat maker of dramas, mingled so artistically in the long and bloodycomedy of the reign of Louis XI. We will not here undertake to developthat singular figure. This barber of the king had three names. At courthe was politely called Olivier le Daim (the Deer); among the peopleOlivier the Devil. His real name was Olivier le Mauvais.Accordingly, Olivier le Mauvais remained motionless, sulking at theking, and glancing askance at Jacques Coictier.Yes, yes, the physician! he said between his teeth.Ah, yes, the physician! retorted Louis XI., with singular good humor;the physician has more credit than you. Tis very simple; he has takenhold upon us by the whole body, and you hold us only by the chin. Come,my poor barber, all will come right. What would you say and what wouldbecome of your office if I were a king like Chilperic, whose gestureconsisted in holding his beard in one hand? Come, gossip mine, fulfilyour office, shave me. Go get what you need therefor.Olivier perceiving that the king had made up his mind to laugh, and thatthere was no way of even annoying him, went off grumbling to execute hisorders.The king rose, approached the window, and suddenly opening it withextraordinary agitation,Oh! yes! he exclaimed, clapping his hands, yonder is a redness in thesky over the City. Tis the bailiff burning. It can be nothing else butthat. Ah! my good people! here you are aiding me at last in tearing downthe rights of lordship!Then turning towards the Flemings: Come, look at this, gentlemen. Is itnot a fire which gloweth yonder?The two men of Ghent drew near.A great fire, said Guillaume Rym.Oh! exclaimed Coppenole, whose eyes suddenly flashed, that reminds meof the burning of the house of the Seigneur d’Hymbercourt. There must bea goodly revolt yonder.You think so, Master Coppenole? And Louis XI. glance was almost asjoyous as that of the hosier. Will it not be difficult to resist?Cross of God! Sire! Your majesty will damage many companies of men ofwar thereon.Ah! I! tis different, returned the king. If I willed. The hosierreplied hardily,If this revolt be what I suppose, sire, you might will in vain.Gossip, said Louis XI., with the two companies of my unattachedtroops and one discharge of a serpentine, short work is made of apopulace of louts.The hosier, in spite of the signs made to him by Guillaume Rym, appeareddetermined to hold his own against the king.Sire, the Swiss were also louts. Monsieur the Duke of Burgundy was agreat gentleman, and he turned up his nose at that rabble rout. At thebattle of Grandson, sire, he cried: Men of the cannon! Fire on thevillains!’ and he swore by SaintGeorge. But Advoyer Scharnachtal hurledhimself on the handsome duke with his battleclub and his people, andwhen the glittering Burgundian army came in contact with these peasantsin bull hides, it flew in pieces like a pane of glass at the blow of apebble. Many lords were then slain by lowborn knaves; and Monsieur deChâteauGuyon, the greatest seigneur in Burgundy, was found dead, withhis gray horse, in a little marsh meadow.Friend, returned the king, you are speaking of a battle. The questionhere is of a mutiny. And I will gain the upper hand of it as soon as itshall please me to frown.The other replied indifferently,That may be, sire; in that case, tis because the people hour hathnot yet come.Guillaume Rym considered it incumbent on him to intervene,Master Coppenole, you are speaking to a puissant king.I know it, replied the hosier, gravely.Let him speak, Monsieur Rym, my friend, said the king; I love thisfrankness of speech. My father, Charles the Seventh, was accustomedto say that the truth was ailing; I thought her dead, and that she hadfound no confessor. Master Coppenole undeceiveth me.Then, laying his hand familiarly on Coppenole shoulder,You were saying, Master Jacques?I say, sire, that you may possibly be in the right, that the hour ofthe people may not yet have come with you.Louis XI. gazed at him with his penetrating eye,And when will that hour come, master?You will hear it strike.On what clock, if you please?Coppenole, with his tranquil and rustic countenance, made the kingapproach the window.Listen, sire! There is here a donjon keep, a belfry, cannons,bourgeois, soldiers; when the belfry shall hum, when the cannonsshall roar, when the donjon shall fall in ruins amid great noise, whenbourgeois and soldiers shall howl and slay each other, the hour willstrike.Louis face grew sombre and dreamy. He remained silent for a moment,then he gently patted with his hand the thick wall of the donjon, as onestrokes the haunches of a steed.Oh! no! said he. You will not crumble so easily, will you, my goodBastille?And turning with an abrupt gesture towards the sturdy Fleming,Have you never seen a revolt, Master Jacques?I have made them, said the hosier.How do you set to work to make a revolt? said the king.Ah! replied Coppenole, tis not very difficult. There are a hundredways. In the first place, there must be discontent in the city. Thething is not uncommon. And then, the character of the inhabitants. Thoseof Ghent are easy to stir into revolt. They always love the princeson; the prince, never. Well! One morning, I will suppose, some oneenters my shop, and says to me: Father Coppenole, there is this andthere is that, the Demoiselle of Flanders wishes to save her ministers,the grand bailiff is doubling the impost on shagreen, or somethingelse,’what you will. I leave my work as it stands, I come out of myhosier stall, and I shout: To the sack?’ There is always some smashedcask at hand. I mount it, and I say aloud, in the first words that occurto me, what I have on my heart; and when one is of the people, sire,one always has something on the heart: Then people troop up, they shout,they ring the alarm bell, they arm the louts with what they take fromthe soldiers, the market people join in, and they set out. And it willalways be thus, so long as there are lords in the seignories, bourgeoisin the bourgs, and peasants in the country.And against whom do you thus rebel? inquired the king; against yourbailiffs? against your lords?Sometimes; that depends. Against the duke, also, sometimes.Louis XI. returned and seated himself, saying, with a smile,Ah! here they have only got as far as the bailiffs.At that instant Olivier le Daim returned. He was followed by two pages,who bore the king toilet articles; but what struck Louis XI. was thathe was also accompanied by the provost of Paris and the chevalier ofthe watch, who appeared to be in consternation. The spiteful barberalso wore an air of consternation, which was one of contentment beneath,however. It was he who spoke first.Sire, I ask your majesty pardon for the calamitous news which Ibring.The king turned quickly and grazed the mat on the floor with the feet ofhis chair,What does this mean?Sire, resumed Olivier le Daim, with the malicious air of a man whorejoices that he is about to deal a violent blow, tis not against thebailiff of the courts that this popular sedition is directed.Against whom, then?Against you, sire?’The aged king rose erect and straight as a young man,Explain yourself, Olivier! And guard your head well, gossip; for Iswear to you by the cross of SaintLô that, if you lie to us at thishour, the sword which severed the head of Monsieur de Luxembourg is notso notched that it cannot yet sever yours!The oath was formidable; Louis XI. had only sworn twice in the course ofhis life by the cross of SaintLô.Olivier opened his mouth to reply.SireOn your knees! interrupted the king violently. Tristan, have an eyeto this man.Olivier knelt down and said coldly,Sire, a sorceress was condemned to death by your court of parliament.She took refuge in NotreDame. The people are trying to take her fromthence by main force. Monsieur the provost and monsieur the chevalier ofthe watch, who have just come from the riot, are here to give me the lieif this is not the truth. The populace is besieging NotreDame.Yes, indeed! said the king in a low voice, all pale and trembling withwrath. NotreDame! They lay siege to our Lady, my good mistress inher cathedral!Rise, Olivier. You are right. I give you Simon Radincharge. You are right. Tis I whom they are attacking. The witch isunder the protection of this church, the church is under my protection.And I thought that they were acting against the bailiff! Tis againstmyself!Then, rendered young by fury, he began to walk up and down with longstrides. He no longer laughed, he was terrible, he went and came; thefox was changed into a hyaena. He seemed suffocated to such a degreethat he could not speak; his lips moved, and his fleshless fists wereclenched. All at once he raised his head, his hollow eye appeared fullof light, and his voice burst forth like a clarion: Down with them,Tristan! A heavy hand for these rascals! Go, Tristan, my friend! slay!slay!This eruption having passed, he returned to his seat, and said with coldand concentrated wrath,Here, Tristan! There are here with us in the Bastille the fifty lancesof the Vicomte de Gif, which makes three hundred horse: you will takethem. There is also the company of our unattached archers of Monsieur deChâteaupers: you will take it. You are provost of the marshals; you havethe men of your provostship: you will take them. At the Hôtel SaintPolyou will find forty archers of monsieur the dauphin new guard: youwill take them. And, with all these, you will hasten to NotreDame.Ah! messieurs, louts of Paris, do you fling yourselves thus againstthe crown of France, the sanctity of NotreDame, and the peace of thiscommonwealth! Exterminate, Tristan! exterminate! and let not a singleone escape, except it be for Montfauçon.Tristan bowed. Tis well, sire.He added, after a silence, And what shall I do with the sorceress?This question caused the king to meditate.Ah! said he, the sorceress! Monsieur d’Estouteville, what did thepeople wish to do with her?Sire, replied the provost of Paris, I imagine that since the populacehas come to tear her from her asylum in NotreDame, tis because thatimpunity wounds them, and they desire to hang her.The king appeared to reflect deeply: then, addressing Tristan l’Hermite,Well! gossip, exterminate the people and hang the sorceress.That it, said Rym in a low tone to Coppenole, punish the people forwilling a thing, and then do what they wish.Enough, sire, replied Tristan. If the sorceress is still inNotreDame, must she be seized in spite of the sanctuary?_PasqueDieu_! the sanctuary! said the king, scratching his ear. Butthe woman must be hung, nevertheless.Here, as though seized with a sudden idea, he flung himself on his kneesbefore his chair, took off his hat, placed it on the seat, and gazingdevoutly at one of the leaden amulets which loaded it down, Oh! saidhe, with clasped hands, our Lady of Paris, my gracious patroness,pardon me. I will only do it this once. This criminal must be punished.I assure you, madame the virgin, my good mistress, that she is asorceress who is not worthy of your amiable protection. You know,madame, that many very pious princes have overstepped the privilegesof the churches for the glory of God and the necessities of the State.Saint Hugues, bishop of England, permitted King Edward to hang a witchin his church. SaintLouis of France, my master, transgressed, with thesame object, the church of Monsieur SaintPaul; and Monsieur Alphonse,son of the king of Jerusalem, the very church of the Holy Sepulchre.Pardon me, then, for this once. Our Lady of Paris, I will never do soagain, and I will give you a fine statue of silver, like the one which Igave last year to Our Lady of Ecouys. So be it.He made the sign of the cross, rose, donned his hat once more, and saidto Tristan,Be diligent, gossip. Take Monsieur Châteaupers with you. You will causethe tocsin to be sounded. You will crush the populace. You will seizethe witch. Tis said. And I mean the business of the execution to bedone by you. You will render me an account of it. Come, Olivier, I shallnot go to bed this night. Shave me.Tristan l’Hermite bowed and departed. Then the king, dismissing Rym andCoppenole with a gesture,God guard you, messieurs, my good friends the Flemings. Go, take alittle repose. The night advances, and we are nearer the morning thanthe evening.Both retired and gained their apartments under the guidance of thecaptain of the Bastille. Coppenole said to Guillaume Rym,Hum! I have had enough of that coughing king! I have seen Charles ofBurgundy drunk, and he was less malignant than Louis XI. when ailing.Master Jacques, replied Rym, tis because wine renders kings lesscruel than does barley water.CHAPTER VI. LITTLE SWORD IN POCKET.On emerging from the Bastille, Gringoire descended the Rue SaintAntoinewith the swiftness of a runaway horse. On arriving at the Baudoyer gate,he walked straight to the stone cross which rose in the middle of thatplace, as though he were able to distinguish in the darkness the figureof a man clad and cloaked in black, who was seated on the steps of thecross.Is it you, master? said Gringoire.The personage in black rose.Death and passion! You make me boil, Gringoire. The man on the tower ofSaintGervais has just cried halfpast one o’clock in the morning.Oh, retorted Gringoire, tis no fault of mine, but of the watch andthe king. I have just had a narrow escape. I always just miss beinghung. Tis my predestination.You lack everything, said the other. But come quickly. Have you thepassword?Fancy, master, I have seen the king. I come from him. He wears fustianbreeches. Tis an adventure.Oh! distaff of words! what is your adventure to me! Have you thepassword of the outcasts?I have it. Be at ease. Little sword in pocket.’Good. Otherwise, we could not make our way as far as the church.The outcasts bar the streets. Fortunately, it appears that they haveencountered resistance. We may still arrive in time.Yes, master, but how are we to get into NotreDame?I have the key to the tower.And how are we to get out again?Behind the cloister there is a little door which opens on the Terrainand the water. I have taken the key to it, and I moored a boat therethis morning.I have had a beautiful escape from being hung! Gringoire repeated.Eh, quick! come! said the other.Both descended towards the city with long strides.CHAPTER VII. CHATEAUPERS TO THE RESCUE.The reader will, perhaps, recall the critical situation in which we leftQuasimodo. The brave deaf man, assailed on all sides, had lost, ifnot all courage, at least all hope of saving, not himself (he was notthinking of himself), but the gypsy. He ran distractedly along thegallery. NotreDame was on the point of being taken by storm bythe outcasts. All at once, a great galloping of horses filled theneighboring streets, and, with a long file of torches and a thick columnof cavaliers, with free reins and lances in rest, these furious soundsdebouched on the Place like a hurricane,France! France! cut down the louts! Châteaupers to the rescue!Provostship! Provostship!The frightened vagabonds wheeled round.Quasimodo who did not hear, saw the naked swords, the torches, theirons of the pikes, all that cavalry, at the head of which he recognizedCaptain Phoebus; he beheld the confusion of the outcasts, the terrorof some, the disturbance among the bravest of them, and from thisunexpected succor he recovered so much strength, that he hurled from thechurch the first assailants who were already climbing into the gallery.It was, in fact, the king troops who had arrived. The vagabondsbehaved bravely. They defended themselves like desperate men. Caught onthe flank, by the Rue SaintPierreauxBoeufs, and in the rear throughthe Rue du Parvis, driven to bay against NotreDame, which theystill assailed and Quasimodo defended, at the same time besiegers andbesieged, they were in the singular situation in which Comte HenriHarcourt, _Taurinum obsessor idem et obsessus_, as his epitaph says,found himself later on, at the famous siege of Turin, in 1640, betweenPrince Thomas of Savoy, whom he was besieging, and the Marquis deLeganez, who was blockading him.The battle was frightful. There was a dog tooth for wolf flesh,as P. Mathieu says. The king cavaliers, in whose midst Phoebus deChâteaupers bore himself valiantly, gave no quarter, and the slash ofthe sword disposed of those who escaped the thrust of the lance. Theoutcasts, badly armed foamed and bit with rage. Men, women, children,hurled themselves on the cruppers and the breasts of the horses, andhung there like cats, with teeth, finger nails and toe nails. Othersstruck the archers’ in the face with their torches. Others thrustiron hooks into the necks of the cavaliers and dragged them down. Theyslashed in pieces those who fell.One was noticed who had a large, glittering scythe, and who, for a longtime, mowed the legs of the horses. He was frightful. He was singinga ditty, with a nasal intonation, he swung and drew back his scytheincessantly. At every blow he traced around him a great circle ofsevered limbs. He advanced thus into the very thickest of the cavalry,with the tranquil slowness, the lolling of the head and the regularbreathing of a harvester attacking a field of wheat. It was ChopinTrouillefou. A shot from an arquebus laid him low.In the meantime, windows had been opened again. The neighbors hearingthe war cries of the king troops, had mingled in the affray, andbullets rained upon the outcasts from every story. The Parvis was filledwith a thick smoke, which the musketry streaked with flame. Throughit one could confusedly distinguish the front of NotreDame, and thedecrepit HôtelDieu with some wan invalids gazing down from the heightsof its roof all checkered with dormer windows.At length the vagabonds gave way. Weariness, the lack of good weapons,the fright of this surprise, the musketry from the windows, the valiantattack of the king troops, all overwhelmed them. They forced theline of assailants, and fled in every direction, leaving the Parvisencumbered with dead.When Quasimodo, who had not ceased to fight for a moment, beheldthis rout, he fell on his knees and raised his hands to heaven; then,intoxicated with joy, he ran, he ascended with the swiftness of a birdto that cell, the approaches to which he had so intrepidly defended.He had but one thought now; it was to kneel before her whom he had justsaved for the second time.When he entered the cell, he found it empty.BOOK ELEVENTH.CHAPTER I. THE LITTLE SHOE.La Esmeralda was sleeping at the moment when the outcasts assailed thechurch.Soon the everincreasing uproar around the edifice, and the uneasybleating of her goat which had been awakened, had roused her fromher slumbers. She had sat up, she had listened, she had looked; then,terrified by the light and noise, she had rushed from her cell to see.The aspect of the Place, the vision which was moving in it, the disorderof that nocturnal assault, that hideous crowd, leaping like a cloud offrogs, half seen in the gloom, the croaking of that hoarse multitude,those few red torches running and crossing each other in the darknesslike the meteors which streak the misty surfaces of marshes, this wholescene produced upon her the effect of a mysterious battle between thephantoms of the witches’ sabbath and the stone monsters of the church.Imbued from her very infancy with the superstitions of the Bohemiantribe, her first thought was that she had caught the strange beingspeculiar to the night, in their deeds of witchcraft. Then she ran interror to cower in her cell, asking of her pallet some less terriblenightmare.But little by little the first vapors of terror had been dissipated;from the constantly increasing noise, and from many other signs ofreality, she felt herself besieged not by spectres, but by human beings.Then her fear, though it did not increase, changed its character. Shehad dreamed of the possibility of a popular mutiny to tear her from herasylum. The idea of once more recovering life, hope, Phoebus, who wasever present in her future, the extreme helplessness of her condition,flight cut off, no support, her abandonment, her isolation,thesethoughts and a thousand others overwhelmed her. She fell upon her knees,with her head on her bed, her hands clasped over her head, full ofanxiety and tremors, and, although a gypsy, an idolater, and a pagan,she began to entreat with sobs, mercy from the good Christian God, andto pray to our Lady, her hostess. For even if one believes in nothing,there are moments in life when one is always of the religion of thetemple which is nearest at hand.She remained thus prostrate for a very long time, trembling in truth,more than praying, chilled by the evercloser breath of that furiousmultitude, understanding nothing of this outburst, ignorant of what wasbeing plotted, what was being done, what they wanted, but foreseeing aterrible issue.In the midst of this anguish, she heard some one walking near her. Sheturned round. Two men, one of whom carried a lantern, had just enteredher cell. She uttered a feeble cry.Fear nothing, said a voice which was not unknown to her, it is I.Who are you? she asked.Pierre Gringoire.This name reassured her. She raised her eyes once more, and recognizedthe poet in very fact. But there stood beside him a black figure veiledfrom head to foot, which struck her by its silence.Oh! continued Gringoire in a tone of reproach, Djali recognized mebefore you!The little goat had not, in fact, waited for Gringoire to announce hisname. No sooner had he entered than it rubbed itself gently against hisknees, covering the poet with caresses and with white hairs, for it wasshedding its hair. Gringoire returned the caresses.Who is this with you? said the gypsy, in a low voice.Be at ease, replied Gringoire. Tis one of my friends. Then thephilosopher setting his lantern on the ground, crouched upon the stones,and exclaimed enthusiastically, as he pressed Djali in his arms,Oh! tis a graceful beast, more considerable no doubt, for itneatness than for its size, but ingenious, subtle, and lettered as agrammarian! Let us see, my Djali, hast thou forgotten any of thy prettytricks? How does Master Jacques Charmolue?...The man in black did not allow him to finish. He approached Gringoireand shook him roughly by the shoulder.Gringoire rose.Tis true, said he: I forgot that we are in haste. But that is noreason master, for getting furious with people in this manner. My dearand lovely child, your life is in danger, and Djali also. They wantto hang you again. We are your friends, and we have come to save you.Follow us.Is it true? she exclaimed in dismay.Yes, perfectly true. Come quickly!I am willing, she stammered. But why does not your friend speak?Ah! said Gringoire, tis because his father and mother were fantasticpeople who made him of a taciturn temperament.She was obliged to content herself with this explanation. Gringoire tookher by the hand; his companion picked up the lantern and walked on infront. Fear stunned the young girl. She allowed herself to be led away.The goat followed them, frisking, so joyous at seeing Gringoire againthat it made him stumble every moment by thrusting its horns between hislegs.Such is life, said the philosopher, every time that he camenear falling down; tis often our best friends who cause us to beoverthrown.They rapidly descended the staircase of the towers, crossed the church,full of shadows and solitude, and all reverberating with uproar, whichformed a frightful contrast, and emerged into the courtyard of thecloister by the red door. The cloister was deserted; the canons hadfled to the bishop palace in order to pray together; the courtyardwas empty, a few frightened lackeys were crouching in dark corners. Theydirected their steps towards the door which opened from this court uponthe Terrain. The man in black opened it with a key which he had abouthim. Our readers are aware that the Terrain was a tongue of landenclosed by walls on the side of the City and belonging to the chapterof NotreDame, which terminated the island on the east, behind thechurch. They found this enclosure perfectly deserted. There was hereless tumult in the air. The roar of the outcasts’ assault reached themmore confusedly and less clamorously. The fresh breeze which follows thecurrent of a stream, rustled the leaves of the only tree planted on thepoint of the Terrain, with a noise that was already perceptible. Butthey were still very close to danger. The nearest edifices to them werethe bishop palace and the church. It was plainly evident that therewas great internal commotion in the bishop palace. Its shadowy masswas all furrowed with lights which flitted from window to window; as,when one has just burned paper, there remains a sombre edifice of ashesin which bright sparks run a thousand eccentric courses. Beside them,the enormous towers of NotreDame, thus viewed from behind, with thelong nave above which they rise cut out in black against the red andvast light which filled the Parvis, resembled two gigantic andirons ofsome cyclopean firegrate.What was to be seen of Paris on all sides wavered before the eye ina gloom mingled with light. Rembrandt has such backgrounds to hispictures.The man with the lantern walked straight to the point of the Terrain.There, at the very brink of the water, stood the wormeaten remains of afence of posts latticed with laths, whereon a low vine spread out afew thin branches like the fingers of an outspread hand. Behind, in theshadow cast by this trellis, a little boat lay concealed. The man madea sign to Gringoire and his companion to enter. The goat followed them.The man was the last to step in. Then he cut the boat moorings, pushedit from the shore with a long boathook, and, seizing two oars, seatedhimself in the bow, rowing with all his might towards midstream. TheSeine is very rapid at this point, and he had a good deal of trouble inleaving the point of the island.Gringoire first care on entering the boat was to place the goat onhis knees. He took a position in the stern; and the young girl, whom thestranger inspired with an indefinable uneasiness, seated herself closeto the poet.When our philosopher felt the boat sway, he clapped his hands and kissedDjali between the horns.Oh! said he, now we are safe, all four of us.He added with the air of a profound thinker, One is indebtedsometimes to fortune, sometimes to ruse, for the happy issue of greatenterprises.The boat made its way slowly towards the right shore. The young girlwatched the unknown man with secret terror. He had carefully turned offthe light of his dark lantern. A glimpse could be caught of him in theobscurity, in the bow of the boat, like a spectre. His cowl, which wasstill lowered, formed a sort of mask; and every time that he spread hisarms, upon which hung large black sleeves, as he rowed, one would havesaid they were two huge bat wings. Moreover, he had not yet uttered aword or breathed a syllable. No other noise was heard in the boat thanthe splashing of the oars, mingled with the rippling of the water alongher sides.On my soul! exclaimed Gringoire suddenly, we are as cheerful andjoyous as young owls! We preserve the silence of Pythagoreans or fishes!_PasqueDieu_! my friends, I should greatly like to have some one speakto me. The human voice is music to the human ear. Tis not I whosay that, but Didymus of Alexandria, and they are illustrious words.Assuredly, Didymus of Alexandria is no mediocre philosopher.One word,my lovely child! say but one word to me, I entreat you. By the way, youhad a droll and peculiar little pout; do you still make it? Do youknow, my dear, that parliament hath full jurisdiction over all places ofasylum, and that you were running a great risk in your little chamber atNotreDame? Alas! the little bird trochylus maketh its nest in the jawsof the crocodile.Master, here is the moon reappearing. If onlythey do not perceive us. We are doing a laudable thing in savingmademoiselle, and yet we should be hung by order of the king if we werecaught. Alas! human actions are taken by two handles. That is brandedwith disgrace in one which is crowned in another. He admires Cicero whoblames Catiline. Is it not so, master? What say you to thisphilosophy? I possess philosophy by instinct, by nature, _ut apesgeometriam_.Come! no one answers me. What unpleasant moods you two arein! I must do all the talking alone. That is what we call a monologuein tragedy._PasqueDieu_! I must inform you that I have just seenthe king, Louis XI., and that I have caught this oath fromhim,_PasqueDieu_! They are still making a hearty howl in thecity.Tis a villanous, malicious old king. He is all swathed in furs.He still owes me the money for my epithalamium, and he came within anick of hanging me this evening, which would have been very inconvenientto me.He is niggardly towards men of merit. He ought to read the fourbooks of Salvien of Cologne, _Adversits Avaritiam_. In truth! Tis apaltry king in his ways with men of letters, and one who commits verybarbarous cruelties. He is a sponge, to soak money raised from thepeople. His saving is like the spleen which swelleth with the leannessof all the other members. Hence complaints against the hardness of thetimes become murmurs against the prince. Under this gentle and pioussire, the gallows crack with the hung, the blocks rot with blood, theprisons burst like over full bellies. This king hath one hand whichgrasps, and one which hangs. He is the procurator of Dame Tax andMonsieur Gibbet. The great are despoiled of their dignities, andthe little incessantly overwhelmed with fresh oppressions. He is anexorbitant prince. I love not this monarch. And you, master?The man in black let the garrulous poet chatter on. He continued tostruggle against the violent and narrow current, which separates theprow of the City and the stem of the island of NotreDame, which we calltoday the Isle St. Louis.By the way, master! continued Gringoire suddenly. At the momentwhen we arrived on the Parvis, through the enraged outcasts, did yourreverence observe that poor little devil whose skull your deaf man wasjust cracking on the railing of the gallery of the kings? I am nearsighted and I could not recognize him. Do you know who he could be?The stranger answered not a word. But he suddenly ceased rowing,his arms fell as though broken, his head sank on his breast, and laEsmeralda heard him sigh convulsively. She shuddered. She had heard suchsighs before.The boat, abandoned to itself, floated for several minutes with thestream. But the man in black finally recovered himself, seized the oarsonce more and began to row against the current. He doubled the point ofthe Isle of Notre Dame, and made for the landingplace of the Port anFoin.Ah! said Gringoire, yonder is the Barbeau mansion.Stay, master,look: that group of black roofs which make such singular angles yonder,above that heap of black, fibrous grimy, dirty clouds, where the moon iscompletely crushed and spread out like the yolk of an egg whose shellis broken.Tis a fine mansion. There is a chapel crowned with a smallvault full of very well carved enrichments. Above, you can see the belltower, very delicately pierced. There is also a pleasant garden, whichconsists of a pond, an aviary, an echo, a mall, a labyrinth, a housefor wild beasts, and a quantity of leafy alleys very agreeable to Venus.There is also a rascal of a tree which is called the lewd,’ because itfavored the pleasures of a famous princess and a constable of France,who was a gallant and a wit.Alas! we poor philosophers are to aconstable as a plot of cabbages or a radish bed to the garden of theLouvre. What matters it, after all? human life, for the great as wellas for us, is a mixture of good and evil. Pain is always by the sideof joy, the spondee by the dactyl.Master, I must relate to you thehistory of the Barbeau mansion. It ends in tragic fashion. It was in1319, in the reign of Philippe V., the longest reign of the kings ofFrance. The moral of the story is that the temptations of the flesh arepernicious and malignant. Let us not rest our glance too long on ourneighbor wife, however gratified our senses may be by her beauty.Fornication is a very libertine thought. Adultery is a prying into thepleasures of othersOhé! the noise yonder is redoubling!The tumult around NotreDame was, in fact, increasing. They listened.Cries of victory were heard with tolerable distinctness. All at once, ahundred torches, the light of which glittered upon the helmets of menat arms, spread over the church at all heights, on the towers, on thegalleries, on the flying buttresses. These torches seemed to be insearch of something; and soon distant clamors reached the fugitivesdistinctly:The gypsy! the sorceress! death to the gypsy!The unhappy girl dropped her head upon her hands, and the unknown beganto row furiously towards the shore. Meanwhile our philosopher reflected.He clasped the goat in his arms, and gently drew away from the gypsy,who pressed closer and closer to him, as though to the only asylum whichremained to her.It is certain that Gringoire was enduring cruel perplexity. He wasthinking that the goat also, according to existing law, would be hungif recaptured; which would be a great pity, poor Djali! that he had thustwo condemned creatures attached to him; that his companion asked nobetter than to take charge of the gypsy. A violent combat began betweenhis thoughts, in which, like the Jupiter of the Iliad, he weighed inturn the gypsy and the goat; and he looked at them alternately with eyesmoist with tears, saying between his teeth:But I cannot save you both!A shock informed them that the boat had reached the land at last. Theuproar still filled the city. The unknown rose, approached the gypsy,and endeavored to take her arm to assist her to alight. She repulsed himand clung to the sleeve of Gringoire, who, in his turn, absorbed in thegoat, almost repulsed her. Then she sprang alone from the boat. She wasso troubled that she did not know what she did or whither she was going.Thus she remained for a moment, stunned, watching the water flow past;when she gradually returned to her senses, she found herself aloneon the wharf with the unknown. It appears that Gringoire had takenadvantage of the moment of debarcation to slip away with the goat intothe block of houses of the Rue Greniersurl’Eau.The poor gypsy shivered when she beheld herself alone with this man. Shetried to speak, to cry out, to call Gringoire; her tongue was dumbin her mouth, and no sound left her lips. All at once she feltthe stranger hand on hers. It was a strong, cold hand. Her teethchattered, she turned paler than the ray of moonlight which illuminatedher. The man spoke not a word. He began to ascend towards the Place deGrève, holding her by the hand.At that moment, she had a vague feeling that destiny is an irresistibleforce. She had no more resistance left in her, she allowed herself to bedragged along, running while he walked. At this spot the quay ascended.But it seemed to her as though she were descending a slope.She gazed about her on all sides. Not a single passerby. The quay wasabsolutely deserted. She heard no sound, she felt no people moving savein the tumultuous and glowing city, from which she was separated only byan arm of the Seine, and whence her name reached her, mingled with criesof Death! The rest of Paris was spread around her in great blocks ofshadows.Meanwhile, the stranger continued to drag her along with the samesilence and the same rapidity. She had no recollection of any of theplaces where she was walking. As she passed before a lighted window, shemade an effort, drew up suddenly, and cried out, Help!The bourgeois who was standing at the window opened it, appeared therein his shirt with his lamp, stared at the quay with a stupid air,uttered some words which she did not understand, and closed his shutteragain. It was her last gleam of hope extinguished.The man in black did not utter a syllable; he held her firmly, and setout again at a quicker pace. She no longer resisted, but followed him,completely broken.From time to time she called together a little strength, and said, in avoice broken by the unevenness of the pavement and the breathlessness oftheir flight, Who are you? Who are you? He made no reply.They arrived thus, still keeping along the quay, at a tolerably spacioussquare. It was the Grève. In the middle, a sort of black, erect crosswas visible; it was the gallows. She recognized all this, and saw whereshe was.The man halted, turned towards her and raised his cowl.Oh! she stammered, almost petrified, I knew well that it was heagain!It was the priest. He looked like the ghost of himself; that is aneffect of the moonlight, it seems as though one beheld only the spectresof things in that light.Listen! he said to her; and she shuddered at the sound of that fatalvoice which she had not heard for a long time. He continued speakingwith those brief and panting jerks, which betoken deep internalconvulsions. Listen! we are here. I am going to speak to you. This isthe Grève. This is an extreme point. Destiny gives us to one another. Iam going to decide as to your life; you will decide as to my soul. Hereis a place, here is a night beyond which one sees nothing. Then listento me. I am going to tell you...In the first place, speak not to meof your Phoebus. (As he spoke thus he paced to and fro, like a man whocannot remain in one place, and dragged her after him.) Do not speak tome of him. Do you see? If you utter that name, I know not what I shalldo, but it will be terrible.Then, like a body which recovers its centre of gravity, he becamemotionless once more, but his words betrayed no less agitation. Hisvoice grew lower and lower.Do not turn your head aside thus. Listen to me. It is a serious matter.In the first place, here is what has happened.All this will not belaughed at. I swear it to you.What was I saying? Remind me! Oh!Thereis a decree of Parliament which gives you back to the scaffold. I havejust rescued you from their hands. But they are pursuing you. Look!He extended his arm toward the City. The search seemed, in fact, tobe still in progress there. The uproar drew nearer; the tower of thelieutenant house, situated opposite the Grève, was full of clamorsand light, and soldiers could be seen running on the opposite quay withtorches and these cries, The gypsy! Where is the gypsy! Death! Death!You see that they are in pursuit of you, and that I am not lying toyou. I love you.Do not open your mouth; refrain from speaking to merather, if it be only to tell me that you hate me. I have made up mymind not to hear that again.I have just saved you.Let me finishfirst. I can save you wholly. I have prepared everything. It is yours atwill. If you wish, I can do it.He broke off violently. No, that is not what I should say!As he went with hurried step and made her hurry also, for he did notrelease her, he walked straight to the gallows, and pointed to it withhis finger,Choose between us two, he said, coldly.She tore herself from his hands and fell at the foot of the gibbet,embracing that funereal support, then she half turned her beautifulhead, and looked at the priest over her shoulder. One would have saidthat she was a Holy Virgin at the foot of the cross. The priest remainedmotionless, his finger still raised toward the gibbet, preserving hisattitude like a statue. At length the gypsy said to him,It causes me less horror than you do.Then he allowed his arm to sink slowly, and gazed at the pavement inprofound dejection.If these stones could speak, he murmured, yes, they would say that a very unhappy man stands here.He went on. The young girl, kneeling before the gallows, enveloped inher long flowing hair, let him speak on without interruption. He now hada gentle and plaintive accent which contrasted sadly with the haughtyharshness of his features.I love you. Oh! how true that is! So nothing comes of that fire whichburns my heart! Alas! young girl, night and dayyes, night and day Itell you,it is torture. Oh! I suffer too much, my poor child. Tis athing deserving of compassion, I assure you. You see that I speak gentlyto you. I really wish that you should no longer cherish this horrorof me.After all, if a man loves a woman, tis not his fault!Oh, myGod!What! So you will never pardon me? You will always hate me? All isover then. It is that which renders me evil, do you see? and horribleto myself.You will not even look at me! You are thinking of somethingelse, perchance, while I stand here and talk to you, shuddering on thebrink of eternity for both of us! Above all things, do not speak to meof the officer!I would cast myself at your knees, I would kiss notyour feet, but the earth which is under your feet; I would sob likea child, I would tear from my breast not words, but my very heart andvitals, to tell you that I love you;all would be useless, all!Andyet you have nothing in your heart but what is tender and merciful.You are radiant with the most beautiful mildness; you are wholly sweet,good, pitiful, and charming. Alas! You cherish no ill will for any onebut me alone! Oh! what a fatality!He hid his face in his hands. The young girl heard him weeping. It wasfor the first time. Thus erect and shaken by sobs, he was moremiserable and more suppliant than when on his knees. He wept thus for aconsiderable time.Come! he said, these first tears passed, I have no more words. I had,however, thought well as to what you would say. Now I tremble and shiverand break down at the decisive moment, I feel conscious of somethingsupreme enveloping us, and I stammer. Oh! I shall fall upon the pavementif you do not take pity on me, pity on yourself. Do not condemn us both.If you only knew how much I love you! What a heart is mine! Oh! whatdesertion of all virtue! What desperate abandonment of myself! A doctor,I mock at science; a gentleman, I tarnish my own name; a priest, I makeof the missal a pillow of sensuality, I spit in the face of my God! allthis for thee, enchantress! to be more worthy of thy hell! And you willnot have the apostate! Oh! let me tell you all! more still, somethingmore horrible, oh! Yet more horrible!....As he uttered these last words, his air became utterly distracted. Hewas silent for a moment, and resumed, as though speaking to himself, andin a strong voice,Cain, what hast thou done with thy brother?There was another silence, and he went onWhat have I done with him, Lord? I received him, I reared him, Inourished him, I loved him, I idolized him, and I have slain him! Yes,Lord, they have just dashed his head before my eyes on the stone ofthine house, and it is because of me, because of this woman, because ofher.His eye was wild. His voice grew ever weaker; he repeated many times,yet, mechanically, at tolerably long intervals, like a bell prolongingits last vibration: Because of her.Because of her.Then his tongue no longer articulated any perceptible sound; buthis lips still moved. All at once he sank together, like somethingcrumbling, and lay motionless on the earth, with his head on his knees.A touch from the young girl, as she drew her foot from under him,brought him to himself. He passed his hand slowly over his hollowcheeks, and gazed for several moments at his fingers, which were wet,What! he murmured, I have wept!And turning suddenly to the gypsy with unspeakable anguish,Alas! you have looked coldly on at my tears! Child, do you know thatthose tears are of lava? Is it indeed true? Nothing touches when itcomes from the man whom one does not love. If you were to see me die,you would laugh. Oh! I do not wish to see you die! One word! A singleword of pardon! Say not that you love me, say only that you will do it;that will suffice; I will save you. If notoh! the hour is passing. Ientreat you by all that is sacred, do not wait until I shall have turnedto stone again, like that gibbet which also claims you! Reflect thatI hold the destinies of both of us in my hand, that I am mad,it isterrible,that I may let all go to destruction, and that there isbeneath us a bottomless abyss, unhappy girl, whither my fall will followyours to all eternity! One word of kindness! Say one word! only oneword!She opened her mouth to answer him. He flung himself on his knees toreceive with adoration the word, possibly a tender one, which was on thepoint of issuing from her lips. She said to him, You are an assassin!The priest clasped her in his arms with fury, and began to laugh with anabominable laugh.Well, yes, an assassin! he said, and I will have you. You will nothave me for your slave, you shall have me for your master. I will haveyou! I have a den, whither I will drag you. You will follow me, youwill be obliged to follow me, or I will deliver you up! You must die, mybeauty, or be mine! belong to the priest! belong to the apostate! belongto the assassin! this very night, do you hear? Come! joy; kiss me, madgirl! The tomb or my bed!His eyes sparkled with impurity and rage. His lewd lips reddened theyoung girl neck. She struggled in his arms. He covered her withfurious kisses.Do not bite me, monster! she cried. Oh! the foul, odious monk! leaveme! I will tear out thy ugly gray hair and fling it in thy face by thehandful!He reddened, turned pale, then released her and gazed at her with agloomy air. She thought herself victorious, and continued,I tell you that I belong to my Phoebus, that tis Phoebus whom I love,that tis Phoebus who is handsome! you are old, priest! you are ugly!Begone!He gave vent to a horrible cry, like the wretch to whom a hot iron isapplied. Die, then! he said, gnashing his teeth. She saw his terriblelook and tried to fly. He caught her once more, he shook her, he flungher on the ground, and walked with rapid strides towards the cornerof the TourRoland, dragging her after him along the pavement by herbeautiful hands.On arriving there, he turned to her,For the last time, will you be mine?She replied with emphasis,No!Then he cried in a loud voice,Gudule! Gudule! here is the gypsy! take your vengeance!The young girl felt herself seized suddenly by the elbow. She looked.A fleshless arm was stretched from an opening in the wall, and held herlike a hand of iron.Hold her well, said the priest; tis the gypsy escaped. Release hernot. I will go in search of the sergeants. You shall see her hanged.A guttural laugh replied from the interior of the wall to these bloodywordsHah! hah! hah!The gypsy watched the priest retire inthe direction of the Pont NotreDame. A cavalcade was heard in thatdirection.The young girl had recognized the spiteful recluse. Panting with terror,she tried to disengage herself. She writhed, she made many starts ofagony and despair, but the other held her with incredible strength. Thelean and bony fingers which bruised her, clenched on her flesh and metaround it. One would have said that this hand was riveted to her arm. Itwas more than a chain, more than a fetter, more than a ring of iron, itwas a living pair of pincers endowed with intelligence, which emergedfrom the wall.She fell back against the wall exhausted, and then the fear of deathtook possession of her. She thought of the beauty of life, of youth, ofthe view of heaven, the aspects of nature, of her love for Phoebus, ofall that was vanishing and all that was approaching, of the priest whowas denouncing her, of the headsman who was to come, of the gallowswhich was there. Then she felt terror mount to the very roots of herhair and she heard the mocking laugh of the recluse, saying to her in avery low tone: Hah! hah! hah! you are going to be hanged!She turned a dying look towards the window, and she beheld the fierceface of the sacked nun through the bars.What have I done to you? she said, almost lifeless.The recluse did not reply, but began to mumble with a singsongirritated, mocking intonation: Daughter of Egypt! daughter of Egypt!daughter of Egypt!The unhappy Esmeralda dropped her head beneath her flowing hair,comprehending that it was no human being she had to deal with.All at once the recluse exclaimed, as though the gypsy question hadtaken all this time to reach her brain,What have you done to me?’you say! Ah! what have you done to me, gypsy! Well! listen.I had achild! you see! I had a child! a child, I tell you!a pretty littlegirl!my Agnes! she went on wildly, kissing something in thedark.Well! do you see, daughter of Egypt? they took my child from me;they stole my child; they ate my child. That is what you have done tome.The young girl replied like a lamb,Alas! perchance I was not born then!Oh! yes! returned the recluse, you must have been born. You wereamong them. She would be the same age as you! so!I have been herefifteen years; fifteen years have I suffered; fifteen years have Iprayed; fifteen years have I beat my head against these four wallsItell you that twas the gypsies who stole her from me, do you hear that?and who ate her with their teeth.Have you a heart? imagine a childplaying, a child sucking; a child sleeping. It is so innocent athing!Well! that, that is what they took from me, what they killed.The good God knows it well! Today, it is my turn; I am going to eat thegypsy.Oh! I would bite you well, if the bars did not prevent me! Myhead is too large!Poor little one! while she was asleep! And ifthey woke her up when they took her, in vain she might cry; I was notthere!Ah! gypsy mothers, you devoured my child! come see your own.Then she began to laugh or to gnash her teeth, for the two thingsresembled each other in that furious face. The day was beginning todawn. An ashy gleam dimly lighted this scene, and the gallows grew moreand more distinct in the square. On the other side, in the direction ofthe bridge of NotreDame, the poor condemned girl fancied that she heardthe sound of cavalry approaching.Madam, she cried, clasping her hands and falling on her knees,dishevelled, distracted, mad with fright; madam! have pity! They arecoming. I have done nothing to you. Would you wish to see me die in thishorrible fashion before your very eyes? You are pitiful, I am sure. Itis too frightful. Let me make my escape. Release me! Mercy. I do notwish to die like that!Give me back my child! said the recluse.Mercy! Mercy!Give me back my child!Release me, in the name of heaven!Give me back my child!Again the young girl fell; exhausted, broken, and having already theglassy eye of a person in the grave.Alas! she faltered, you seek your child, I seek my parents.Give me back my little Agnes! pursued Gudule. You do not know whereshe is? Then die!I will tell you. I was a woman of the town, I had achild, they took my child. It was the gypsies. You see plainly that youmust die. When your mother, the gypsy, comes to reclaim you, I shall sayto her: Mother, look at that gibbet!Or, give me back my child. Do youknow where she is, my little daughter? Stay! I will show you. Here isher shoe, all that is left me of her. Do you know where its mate is? Ifyou know, tell me, and if it is only at the other end of the world, Iwill crawl to it on my knees.As she spoke thus, with her other arm extended through the window,she showed the gypsy the little embroidered shoe. It was already lightenough to distinguish its shape and its colors.Let me see that shoe, said the gypsy, quivering. God! God!And at the same time, with her hand which was at liberty, she quicklyopened the little bag ornamented with green glass, which she wore abouther neck.Go on, go on! grumbled Gudule, search your demon amulet!All at once, she stopped short, trembled in every limb, and cried in avoice which proceeded from the very depths of her being: My daughter!The gypsy had just drawn from the bag a little shoe absolutely similarto the other. To this little shoe was attached a parchment on which wasinscribed this charm,     _Quand le parell retrouveras     Ta mere te tendras les bras_.   When thou shalt find its mate, thy mother will stretch outher arms to thee.Quicker than a flash of lightning, the recluse had laid the two shoestogether, had read the parchment and had put close to the bars of thewindow her face beaming with celestial joy as she cried,My daughter! my daughter!My mother! said the gypsy.Here we are unequal to the task of depicting the scene. The wall and theiron bars were between them. Oh! the wall! cried the recluse. Oh! tosee her and not to embrace her! Your hand! your hand!The young girl passed her arm through the opening; the recluse threwherself on that hand, pressed her lips to it and there remained, buriedin that kiss, giving no other sign of life than a sob which heaved herbreast from time to time. In the meanwhile, she wept in torrents, insilence, in the dark, like a rain at night. The poor mother poured outin floods upon that adored hand the dark and deep well of tears, whichlay within her, and into which her grief had filtered, drop by drop, forfifteen years.All at once she rose, flung aside her long gray hair from her brow, andwithout uttering a word, began to shake the bars of her cage cell, withboth hands, more furiously than a lioness. The bars held firm. Then shewent to seek in the corner of her cell a huge paving stone, which servedher as a pillow, and launched it against them with such violence thatone of the bars broke, emitting thousands of sparks. A second blowcompletely shattered the old iron cross which barricaded the window.Then with her two hands, she finished breaking and removing the rustedstumps of the bars. There are moments when woman hands possesssuperhuman strength.A passage broken, less than a minute was required for her to seize herdaughter by the middle of her body, and draw her into her cell. Comelet me draw you out of the abyss, she murmured.When her daughter was inside the cell, she laid her gently on theground, then raised her up again, and bearing her in her arms as thoughshe were still only her little Agnes, she walked to and fro in herlittle room, intoxicated, frantic, joyous, crying out, singing, kissingher daughter, talking to her, bursting into laughter, melting intotears, all at once and with vehemence.My daughter! my daughter! she said. I have my daughter! here she is!The good God has given her back to me! Ha you! come all of you! Is thereany one there to see that I have my daughter? Lord Jesus, how beautifulshe is! You have made me wait fifteen years, my good God, but it was inorder to give her back to me beautiful.Then the gypsies did not eather! Who said so? My little daughter! my little daughter! Kiss me. Thosegood gypsies! I love the gypsies!It is really you! That was what mademy heart leap every time that you passed by. And I took that for hatred!Forgive me, my Agnes, forgive me. You thought me very malicious, didyou not? I love you. Have you still the little mark on your neck? Letus see. She still has it. Oh! you are beautiful! It was I who gave youthose big eyes, mademoiselle. Kiss me. I love you. It is nothing to methat other mothers have children; I scorn them now. They have only tocome and see. Here is mine. See her neck, her eyes, her hair, her hands.Find me anything as beautiful as that! Oh! I promise you she will havelovers, that she will! I have wept for fifteen years. All my beauty hasdeparted and has fallen to her. Kiss me.She addressed to her a thousand other extravagant remarks, whose accentconstituted their sole beauty, disarranged the poor girl garments evento the point of making her blush, smoothed her silky hair with her hand,kissed her foot, her knee, her brow, her eyes, was in raptures overeverything. The young girl let her have her way, repeating at intervalsand very low and with infinite tenderness, My mother!Do you see, my little girl, resumed the recluse, interspersing herwords with kisses, I shall love you dearly? We will go away from here.We are going to be very happy. I have inherited something in Reims, inour country. You know Reims? Ah! no, you do not know it; you were toosmall! If you only knew how pretty you were at the age of four months!Tiny feet that people came even from Epernay, which is seven leaguesaway, to see! We shall have a field, a house. I will put you to sleep inmy bed. My God! my God! who would believe this? I have my daughter!Oh, my mother! said the young girl, at length finding strength tospeak in her emotion, the gypsy woman told me so. There was a goodgypsy of our band who died last year, and who always cared for me likea nurse. It was she who placed this little bag about my neck. She alwayssaid to me: Little one, guard this jewel well! Tis a treasure. It willcause thee to find thy mother once again. Thou wearest thy mother aboutthy neck.’The gypsy predicted it!The sacked nun again pressed her daughter in her arms.Come, let me kiss you! You say that prettily. When we are in thecountry, we will place these little shoes on an infant Jesus in thechurch. We certainly owe that to the good, holy Virgin. What a prettyvoice you have! When you spoke to me just now, it was music! Ah! my LordGod! I have found my child again! But is this story credible? Nothingwill kill oneor I should have died of joy.And then she began to clap her hands again and to laugh and to cry out:We are going to be so happy!At that moment, the cell resounded with the clang of arms and agalloping of horses which seemed to be coming from the Pont NotreDame,amid advancing farther and farther along the quay. The gypsy threwherself with anguish into the arms of the sacked nun.Save me! save me! mother! they are coming!Oh, heaven! what are you saying? I had forgotten! They are in pursuitof you! What have you done?I know not, replied the unhappy child; but I am condemned to die.To die! said Gudule, staggering as though struck by lightning; todie! she repeated slowly, gazing at her daughter with staring eyes.Yes, mother, replied the frightened young girl, they want to kill me.They are coming to seize me. That gallows is for me! Save me! save me!They are coming! Save me!The recluse remained for several moments motionless and petrified, thenshe moved her head in sign of doubt, and suddenly giving vent to a burstof laughter, but with that terrible laugh which had come back to her,Ho! ho! no! tis a dream of which you are telling me. Ah, yes! I losther, that lasted fifteen years, and then I found her again, and thatlasted a minute! And they would take her from me again! And now, whenshe is beautiful, when she is grown up, when she speaks to me, when sheloves me; it is now that they would come to devour her, before my veryeyes, and I her mother! Oh! no! these things are not possible. The goodGod does not permit such things as that.Here the cavalcade appeared to halt, and a voice was heard to say in thedistance,This way, Messire Tristan! The priest says that we shall find her atthe RatHole. The noise of the horses began again.The recluse sprang to her feet with a shriek of despair. Fly! fly! mychild! All comes back to me. You are right. It is your death! Horror!Maledictions! Fly!She thrust her head through the window, and withdrew it again hastily.Remain, she said, in a low, curt, and lugubrious tone, as she pressedthe hand of the gypsy, who was more dead than alive. Remain! Do notbreathe! There are soldiers everywhere. You cannot get out. It is toolight.Her eyes were dry and burning. She remained silent for a moment; but shepaced the cell hurriedly, and halted now and then to pluck out handfulsof her gray hairs, which she afterwards tore with her teeth.Suddenly she said: They draw near. I will speak with them. Hideyourself in this corner. They will not see you. I will tell them thatyou have made your escape. That I released you, i’ faith!She set her daughter (down for she was still carrying her), in onecorner of the cell which was not visible from without. She made hercrouch down, arranged her carefully so that neither foot nor handprojected from the shadow, untied her black hair which she spread overher white robe to conceal it, placed in front of her her jug and herpaving stone, the only articles of furniture which she possessed,imagining that this jug and stone would hide her. And when this wasfinished she became more tranquil, and knelt down to pray. The day,which was only dawning, still left many shadows in the RatHole.At that moment, the voice of the priest, that infernal voice, passedvery close to the cell, crying,This way, Captain Phoebus de Châteaupers.At that name, at that voice, la Esmeralda, crouching in her corner, madea movement.Do not stir! said Gudule.She had barely finished when a tumult of men, swords, and horses haltedaround the cell. The mother rose quickly and went to post herself beforeher window, in order to stop it up. She beheld a large troop of armedmen, both horse and foot, drawn up on the Grève.The commander dismounted, and came toward her.Old woman! said this man, who had an atrocious face, we are in searchof a witch to hang her; we were told that you had her.The poor mother assumed as indifferent an air as she could, andreplied,I know not what you mean.The other resumed, _Tête Dieu_! What was it that frightened archdeaconsaid? Where is he?Monseigneur, said a soldier, he has disappeared.Come, now, old madwoman, began the commander again, do not lie. Asorceress was given in charge to you. What have you done with her?The recluse did not wish to deny all, for fear of awakening suspicion,and replied in a sincere and surly tone,If you are speaking of a big young girl who was put into my hands awhile ago, I will tell you that she bit me, and that I released her.There! Leave me in peace.The commander made a grimace of disappointment. Don’t lie to me, oldspectre! said he. My name is Tristan l’Hermite, and I am the kinggossip. Tristan the Hermit, do you hear? He added, as he glanced at thePlace de Grève around him, Tis a name which has an echo here.You might be Satan the Hermit, replied Gudule, who was regaining hope,but I should have nothing else to say to you, and I should never beafraid of you._TêteDieu_, said Tristan, here is a crone! Ah! So the witch girlhath fled! And in which direction did she go? Gudule replied in acareless tone,Through the Rue du Mouton, I believe.Tristan turned his head and made a sign to his troop to prepare to setout on the march again. The recluse breathed freely once more.Monseigneur, suddenly said an archer, ask the old elf why the bars ofher window are broken in this manner.This question brought anguish again to the heart of the miserablemother. Nevertheless, she did not lose all presence of mind.They have always been thus, she stammered.Bah! retorted the archer, only yesterday they still formed a fineblack cross, which inspired devotion.Tristan east a sidelong glance at the recluse.I think the old dame is getting confused!The unfortunate woman felt that all depended on her selfpossession,and, although with death in her soul, she began to grin. Mothers possesssuch strength.Bah! said she, the man is drunk. Tis more than a year since the tailof a stone cart dashed against my window and broke in the grating. Andhow I cursed the carter, too.Tis true, said another archer, I was there.Always and everywhere people are to be found who have seen everything.This unexpected testimony from the archer reencouraged the recluse,whom this interrogatory was forcing to cross an abyss on the edge ofa knife. But she was condemned to a perpetual alternative of hope andalarm.If it was a cart which did it, retorted the first soldier, the stumpsof the bars should be thrust inwards, while they actually are pushedoutwards.Ho! ho! said Tristan to the soldier, you have the nose of aninquisitor of the Châtelet. Reply to what he says, old woman.Good heavens! she exclaimed, driven to bay, and in a voice that wasfull of tears in despite of her efforts, I swear to you, monseigneur,that twas a cart which broke those bars. You hear the man who saw it.And then, what has that to do with your gypsy?Hum! growled Tristan.The devil! went on the soldier, flattered by the provost praise,these fractures of the iron are perfectly fresh.Tristan tossed his head. She turned pale.How long ago, say you, did the cart do it?A month, a fortnight, perhaps, monseigheur, I know not.She first said more than a year, observed the soldier.That is suspicious, said the provost.Monseigneur! she cried, still pressed against the opening, andtrembling lest suspicion should lead them to thrust their heads throughand look into her cell; monseigneur, I swear to you that twas a cartwhich broke this grating. I swear it to you by the angels of paradise.If it was not a cart, may I be eternally damned, and I reject God!You put a great deal of heat into that oath; said Tristan, with hisinquisitorial glance.The poor woman felt her assurance vanishing more and more. She hadreached the point of blundering, and she comprehended with terror thatshe was saying what she ought not to have said.Here another soldier came up, crying,Monsieur, the old hag lies. The sorceress did not flee through the Ruede Mouton. The street chain has remained stretched all night, and thechain guard has seen no one pass.Tristan, whose face became more sinister with every moment, addressedthe recluse,What have you to say to that?She tried to make head against this new incident,That I do not know, monseigneur; that I may have been mistaken. Ibelieve, in fact, that she crossed the water.That is in the opposite direction, said the provost, and it is notvery likely that she would wish to reenter the city, where she wasbeing pursued. You are lying, old woman.And then, added the first soldier, there is no boat either on thisside of the stream or on the other.She swam across, replied the recluse, defending her ground foot byfoot.Do women swim? said the soldier._Tête Dieu_! old woman! You are lying! repeated Tristan angrily. Ihave a good mind to abandon that sorceress and take you. A quarter of anhour of torture will, perchance, draw the truth from your throat. Come!You are to follow us.She seized on these words with avidity.As you please, monseigneur. Do it. Do it. Torture. I am willing. Takeme away. Quick, quick! let us set out at once!During that time, shesaid to herself, my daughter will make her escape.S death! said the provost, what an appetite for the rack! Iunderstand not this madwoman at all.An old, grayhaired sergeant of the guard stepped out of the ranks, andaddressing the provost,Mad in sooth, monseigneur. If she released the gypsy, it was not herfault, for she loves not the gypsies. I have been of the watch thesefifteen years, and I hear her every evening cursing the Bohemian womenwith endless imprecations. If the one of whom we are in pursuit is, as Isuppose, the little dancer with the goat, she detests that one above allthe rest.Gudule made an effort and said,That one above all.The unanimous testimony of the men of the watch confirmed the oldsergeant words to the provost. Tristan l’Hermite, in despair atextracting anything from the recluse, turned his back on her, and withunspeakable anxiety she beheld him direct his course slowly towards hishorse.Come! he said, between his teeth, March on! let us set out again onthe quest. I shall not sleep until that gypsy is hanged.But he still hesitated for some time before mounting his horse. Gudulepalpitated between life and death, as she beheld him cast about thePlace that uneasy look of a hunting dog which instinctively feels thatthe lair of the beast is close to him, and is loath to go away. Atlength he shook his head and leaped into his saddle. Gudule horriblycompressed heart now dilated, and she said in a low voice, as she cast aglance at her daughter, whom she had not ventured to look at while theywere there, Saved!The poor child had remained all this time in her corner, withoutbreathing, without moving, with the idea of death before her. She hadlost nothing of the scene between Gudule and Tristan, and the anguishof her mother had found its echo in her heart. She had heard all thesuccessive snappings of the thread by which she hung suspended over thegulf; twenty times she had fancied that she saw it break, and at lastshe began to breathe again and to feel her foot on firm ground. At thatmoment she heard a voice saying to the provost: _Corboeuf_! Monsieurle Prevôt, tis no affair of mine, a man of arms, to hang witches.The rabble of the populace is suppressed. I leave you to attend to thematter alone. You will allow me to rejoin my company, who are waitingfor their captain.The voice was that of Phoebus de Châteaupers; that which took placewithin her was ineffable. He was there, her friend, her protector, hersupport, her refuge, her Phoebus. She rose, and before her mother couldprevent her, she had rushed to the window, crying,Phoebus! aid me, my Phoebus!Phoebus was no longer there. He had just turned the corner of the Rue dela Coutellerie at a gallop. But Tristan had not yet taken his departure.The recluse rushed upon her daughter with a roar of agony. She draggedher violently back, digging her nails into her neck. A tigress motherdoes not stand on trifles. But it was too late. Tristan had seen.Hé! hé! he exclaimed with a laugh which laid bare all his teeth andmade his face resemble the muzzle of a wolf, two mice in the trap!I suspected as much, said the soldier.Tristan clapped him on the shoulder,You are a good cat! Come! he added, where is Henriet Cousin?A man who had neither the garments nor the air of a soldier, steppedfrom the ranks. He wore a costume half gray, half brown, flat hair,leather sleeves, and carried a bundle of ropes in his huge hand. Thisman always attended Tristan, who always attended Louis XI. Friend, said Tristan l’Hermite, I presume that this is the sorceress of whom weare in search. You will hang me this one. Have you your ladder?There is one yonder, under the shed of the PillarHouse, replied theman. Is it on this justice that the thing is to be done? he added,pointing to the stone gibbet.Yes.Ho, hé! continued the man with a huge laugh, which was still morebrutal than that of the provost, we shall not have far to go.Make haste! said Tristan, you shall laugh afterwards.In the meantime, the recluse had not uttered another word since Tristanhad seen her daughter and all hope was lost. She had flung the poorgypsy, half dead, into the corner of the cellar, and had placed herselfonce more at the window with both hands resting on the angle of the silllike two claws. In this attitude she was seen to cast upon all thosesoldiers her glance which had become wild and frantic once more. At themoment when Rennet Cousin approached her cell, she showed him so savagea face that he shrank back.Monseigneur, he said, returning to the provost, which am I to take?The young one.So much the better, for the old one seemeth difficult.Poor little dancer with the goat! said the old sergeant of the watch.Rennet Cousin approached the window again. The mother eyes made hisown droop. He said with a good deal of timidity,MadamShe interrupted him in a very low but furious voice,What do you ask?It is not you, he said, it is the other.What other?The young one.She began to shake her head, crying,There is no one! there is no one! there is no one!Yes, there is! retorted the hangman, and you know it well. Let metake the young one. I have no wish to harm you.She said, with a strange sneer,Ah! so you have no wish to harm me!Let me have the other, madam; tis monsieur the provost who wills it.She repeated with a look of madness,There is no one here.I tell you that there is! replied the executioner. We have all seenthat there are two of you.Look then! said the recluse, with a sneer. Thrust your head throughthe window.The executioner observed the mother fingernails and dared not.Make haste! shouted Tristan, who had just ranged his troops in acircle round the RatHole, and who sat on his horse beside the gallows.Rennet returned once more to the provost in great embarrassment. He hadflung his rope on the ground, and was twisting his hat between his handswith an awkward air.Monseigneur, he asked, where am I to enter?By the door.There is none.By the window.Tis too small.Make it larger, said Tristan angrily. Have you not pickaxes?The mother still looked on steadfastly from the depths of her cavern.She no longer hoped for anything, she no longer knew what she wished,except that she did not wish them to take her daughter.Rennet Cousin went in search of the chest of tools for the night man,under the shed of the PillarHouse. He drew from it also the doubleladder, which he immediately set up against the gallows. Five or six ofthe provost men armed themselves with picks and crowbars, and Tristanbetook himself, in company with them, towards the window.Old woman, said the provost, in a severe tone, deliver up to us thatgirl quietly.She looked at him like one who does not understand._Tête Dieu_! continued Tristan, why do you try to prevent thissorceress being hung as it pleases the king?The wretched woman began to laugh in her wild way.Why? She is my daughter.The tone in which she pronounced these words made even Henriet Cousinshudder.I am sorry for that, said the provost, but it is the king goodpleasure.She cried, redoubling her terrible laugh,What is your king to me? I tell you that she is my daughter!Pierce the wall, said Tristan.In order to make a sufficiently wide opening, it sufficed to dislodgeone course of stone below the window. When the mother heard the picksand crowbars mining her fortress, she uttered a terrible cry; then shebegan to stride about her cell with frightful swiftness, a wild beasts’habit which her cage had imparted to her. She no longer said anything,but her eyes flamed. The soldiers were chilled to the very soul.All at once she seized her paving stone, laughed, and hurled it withboth fists upon the workmen. The stone, badly flung (for her handstrembled), touched no one, and fell short under the feet of Tristanhorse. She gnashed her teeth.In the meantime, although the sun had not yet risen, it was broaddaylight; a beautiful rose color enlivened the ancient, decayed chimneysof the PillarHouse. It was the hour when the earliest windows of thegreat city open joyously on the roofs. Some workmen, a few fruitsellerson their way to the markets on their asses, began to traverse the Grève;they halted for a moment before this group of soldiers clustered roundthe RatHole, stared at it with an air of astonishment and passed on.The recluse had gone and seated herself by her daughter, covering herwith her body, in front of her, with staring eyes, listening to the poorchild, who did not stir, but who kept murmuring in a low voice, thesewords only, Phoebus! Phoebus! In proportion as the work of thedemolishers seemed to advance, the mother mechanically retreated, andpressed the young girl closer and closer to the wall. All at once, therecluse beheld the stone (for she was standing guard and never tookher eyes from it), move, and she heard Tristan voice encouraging theworkers. Then she aroused from the depression into which she had fallenduring the last few moments, cried out, and as she spoke, her voicenow rent the ear like a saw, then stammered as though all kind ofmaledictions were pressing to her lips to burst forth at once.Ho! ho! ho! Why this is terrible! You are ruffians! Are you reallygoing to take my daughter? Oh! the cowards! Oh! the hangman lackeys!the wretched, blackguard assassins! Help! help! fire! Will they take mychild from me like this? Who is it then who is called the good God?Then, addressing Tristan, foaming at the mouth, with wild eyes, allbristling and on all fours like a female panther,Draw near and take my daughter! Do not you understand that this womantells you that she is my daughter? Do you know what it is to have achild? Eh! lynx, have you never lain with your female? have you neverhad a cub? and if you have little ones, when they howl have you nothingin your vitals that moves?Throw down the stone, said Tristan; it no longer holds.The crowbars raised the heavy course. It was, as we have said, themother last bulwark.She threw herself upon it, she tried to hold it back; she scratched thestone with her nails, but the massive block, set in movement by six men,escaped her and glided gently to the ground along the iron levers.The mother, perceiving an entrance effected, fell down in front of theopening, barricading the breach with her body, beating the pavement withher head, and shrieking with a voice rendered so hoarse by fatigue thatit was hardly audible,Help! fire! fire!Now take the wench, said Tristan, still impassive.The mother gazed at the soldiers in such formidable fashion that theywere more inclined to retreat than to advance.Come, now, repeated the provost. Here you, Rennet Cousin!No one took a step.The provost swore,_Tête de Christ_! my men of war! afraid of a woman!Monseigneur, said Rennet, do you call that a woman?She has the mane of a lion, said another.Come! repeated the provost, the gap is wide enough. Enter threeabreast, as at the breach of Pontoise. Let us make an end of it, deathof Mahom! I will make two pieces of the first man who draws back!Placed between the provost and the mother, both threatening, thesoldiers hesitated for a moment, then took their resolution, andadvanced towards the RatHole.When the recluse saw this, she rose abruptly on her knees, flung asideher hair from her face, then let her thin flayed hands fall by her side.Then great tears fell, one by one, from her eyes; they flowed downher cheeks through a furrow, like a torrent through a bed which it hashollowed for itself.At the same time she began to speak, but in a voice so supplicating,so gentle, so submissive, so heartrending, that more than one oldconvictwarder around Tristan who must have devoured human flesh wipedhis eyes.Messeigneurs! messieurs the sergeants, one word. There is one thingwhich I must say to you. She is my daughter, do you see? my dear littledaughter whom I had lost! Listen. It is quite a history. Consider thatI knew the sergeants very well. They were always good to me in thedays when the little boys threw stones at me, because I led a life ofpleasure. Do you see? You will leave me my child when you know! I was apoor woman of the town. It was the Bohemians who stole her from me. AndI kept her shoe for fifteen years. Stay, here it is. That was the kindof foot which she had. At Reims! La Chantefleurie! Rue FollePeine!Perchance, you knew about that. It was I. In your youth, then, there wasa merry time, when one passed good hours. You will take pity on me, willyou not, gentlemen? The gypsies stole her from me; they hid her from mefor fifteen years. I thought her dead. Fancy, my good friends, believedher to be dead. I have passed fifteen years here in this cellar, withouta fire in winter. It is hard. The poor, dear little shoe! I have criedso much that the good God has heard me. This night he has given mydaughter back to me. It is a miracle of the good God. She was not dead.You will not take her from me, I am sure. If it were myself, I wouldsay nothing; but she, a child of sixteen! Leave her time to see the sun!What has she done to you? nothing at all. Nor have I. If you did butknow that she is all I have, that I am old, that she is a blessing whichthe Holy Virgin has sent to me! And then, you are all so good! You didnot know that she was my daughter; but now you do know it. Oh! I loveher! Monsieur, the grand provost. I would prefer a stab in my own vitalsto a scratch on her finger! You have the air of such a good lord! WhatI have told you explains the matter, does it not? Oh! if you have hada mother, monsiegneur! you are the captain, leave me my child! Considerthat I pray you on my knees, as one prays to Jesus Christ! I ask nothingof any one; I am from Reims, gentlemen; I own a little field inheritedfrom my uncle, Mahiet Pradon. I am no beggar. I wish nothing, but I dowant my child! oh! I want to keep my child! The good God, who is themaster, has not given her back to me for nothing! The king! you say theking! It would not cause him much pleasure to have my little daughterkilled! And then, the king is good! she is my daughter! she is my owndaughter! She belongs not to the king! she is not yours! I want to goaway! we want to go away! and when two women pass, one a mother and theother a daughter, one lets them go! Let us pass! we belong in Reims. Oh!you are very good, messieurs the sergeants, I love you all. You will nottake my dear little one, it is impossible! It is utterly impossible, isit not? My child, my child!We will not try to give an idea of her gestures, her tone, of the tearswhich she swallowed as she spoke, of the hands which she clasped andthen wrung, of the heartbreaking smiles, of the swimming glances,of the groans, the sighs, the miserable and affecting cries which shemingled with her disordered, wild, and incoherent words. When she becamesilent Tristan l’Hermite frowned, but it was to conceal a tear whichwelled up in his tiger eye. He conquered this weakness, however, andsaid in a curt tone,The king wills it.Then he bent down to the ear of Rennet Cousin, and said to him in a verylow tone,Make an end of it quickly! Possibly, the redoubtable provost felt hisheart also failing him.The executioner and the sergeants entered the cell. The mother offeredno resistance, only she dragged herself towards her daughter and threwherself bodily upon her. The gypsy beheld the soldiers approach. Thehorror of death reanimated her,Mother! she shrieked, in a tone of indescribable distress, Mother!they are coming! defend me!Yes, my love, I am defending you! replied the mother, in a dyingvoice; and clasping her closely in her arms, she covered her withkisses. The two lying thus on the earth, the mother upon the daughter,presented a spectacle worthy of pity.Rennet Cousin grasped the young girl by the middle of her body, beneathher beautiful shoulders. When she felt that hand, she cried, Heuh! andfainted. The executioner who was shedding large tears upon her, dropby drop, was about to bear her away in his arms. He tried to detach themother, who had, so to speak, knotted her hands around her daughterwaist; but she clung so strongly to her child, that it was impossibleto separate them. Then Rennet Cousin dragged the young girl outside thecell, and the mother after her. The mother eyes were also closed.At that moment, the sun rose, and there was already on the Place afairly numerous assembly of people who looked on from a distance at whatwas being thus dragged along the pavement to the gibbet. For that wasProvost Tristan way at executions. He had a passion for preventing theapproach of the curious.There was no one at the windows. Only at a distance, at the summit ofthat one of the towers of NotreDame which commands the Grève, two menoutlined in black against the light morning sky, and who seemed to belooking on, were visible.Rennet Cousin paused at the foot of the fatal ladder, with that whichhe was dragging, and, barely breathing, with so much pity did the thinginspire him, he passed the rope around the lovely neck of the younggirl. The unfortunate child felt the horrible touch of the hemp. Sheraised her eyelids, and saw the fleshless arm of the stone gallowsextended above her head. Then she shook herself and shrieked in a loudand heartrending voice: No! no! I will not! Her mother, whose head wasburied and concealed in her daughter garments, said not a word; onlyher whole body could be seen to quiver, and she was heard to redoubleher kisses on her child. The executioner took advantage of this momentto hastily loose the arms with which she clasped the condemned girl.Either through exhaustion or despair, she let him have his way. Then hetook the young girl on his shoulder, from which the charming creaturehung, gracefully bent over his large head. Then he set his foot on theladder in order to ascend.At that moment, the mother who was crouching on the pavement, openedher eyes wide. Without uttering a cry, she raised herself erect witha terrible expression; then she flung herself upon the hand of theexecutioner, like a beast on its prey, and bit it. It was done like aflash of lightning. The headsman howled with pain. Those near by rushedup. With difficulty they withdrew his bleeding hand from the motherteeth. She preserved a profound silence. They thrust her back with muchbrutality, and noticed that her head fell heavily on the pavement. Theyraised her, she fell back again. She was dead.The executioner, who had not loosed his hold on the young girl, began toascend the ladder once more.CHAPTER II. THE BEAUTIFUL CREATURE CLAD IN WHITE. (Dante.)When Quasimodo saw that the cell was empty, that the gypsy was no longerthere, that while he had been defending her she had been abducted, hegrasped his hair with both hands and stamped with surprise and pain;then he set out to run through the entire church seeking his Bohemian,howling strange cries to all the corners of the walls, strewing his redhair on the pavement. It was just at the moment when the king archerswere making their victorious entrance into NotreDame, also in searchof the gypsy. Quasimodo, poor, deaf fellow, aided them in their fatalintentions, without suspecting it; he thought that the outcasts were thegypsy enemies. He himself conducted Tristan l’Hermite to all possiblehidingplaces, opened to him the secret doors, the double bottoms ofthe altars, the rear sacristries. If the unfortunate girl had still beenthere, it would have been he himself who would have delivered her up.When the fatigue of finding nothing had disheartened Tristan, who wasnot easily discouraged, Quasimodo continued the search alone. He madethe tour of the church twenty times, length and breadth, up anddown, ascending and descending, running, calling, shouting, peeping,rummaging, ransacking, thrusting his head into every hole, pushing atorch under every vault, despairing, mad. A male who has lost his femaleis no more roaring nor more haggard.At last when he was sure, perfectly sure that she was no longer there,that all was at an end, that she had been snatched from him, he slowlymounted the staircase to the towers, that staircase which he hadascended with so much eagerness and triumph on the day when he hadsaved her. He passed those same places once more with drooping head,voiceless, tearless, almost breathless. The church was again deserted,and had fallen back into its silence. The archers had quitted it totrack the sorceress in the city. Quasimodo, left alone in that vastNotreDame, so besieged and tumultuous but a short time before, oncemore betook himself to the cell where the gypsy had slept for so manyweeks under his guardianship.As he approached it, he fancied that he might, perhaps, find her there.When, at the turn of the gallery which opens on the roof of the sideaisles, he perceived the tiny cell with its little window and its littledoor crouching beneath a great flying buttress like a bird nest undera branch, the poor man heart failed him, and he leaned against apillar to keep from falling. He imagined that she might have returnedthither, that some good genius had, no doubt, brought her back, thatthis chamber was too tranquil, too safe, too charming for her not tobe there, and he dared not take another step for fear of destroyinghis illusion. Yes, he said to himself, perchance she is sleeping, orpraying. I must not disturb her.At length he summoned up courage, advanced on tiptoe, looked, entered.Empty. The cell was still empty. The unhappy deaf man walked slowlyround it, lifted the bed and looked beneath it, as though she might beconcealed between the pavement and the mattress, then he shook his headand remained stupefied. All at once, he crushed his torch under hisfoot, and, without uttering a word, without giving vent to a sigh, heflung himself at full speed, head foremost against the wall, and fellfainting on the floor.When he recovered his senses, he threw himself on the bed and rollingabout, he kissed frantically the place where the young girl had sleptand which was still warm; he remained there for several moments asmotionless as though he were about to expire; then he rose, drippingwith perspiration, panting, mad, and began to beat his head against thewall with the frightful regularity of the clapper of his bells, andthe resolution of a man determined to kill himself. At length he fella second time, exhausted; he dragged himself on his knees outside thecell, and crouched down facing the door, in an attitude of astonishment.He remained thus for more than an hour without making a movement, withhis eye fixed on the deserted cell, more gloomy, and more pensive than amother seated between an empty cradle and a full coffin. He uttered nota word; only at long intervals, a sob heaved his body violently, but itwas a tearless sob, like summer lightning which makes no noise.It appears to have been then, that, seeking at the bottom of his lonelythoughts for the unexpected abductor of the gypsy, he thought of thearchdeacon. He remembered that Dom Claude alone possessed a key to thestaircase leading to the cell; he recalled his nocturnal attempts onthe young girl, in the first of which he, Quasimodo, had assisted, thesecond of which he had prevented. He recalled a thousand details, andsoon he no longer doubted that the archdeacon had taken the gypsy.Nevertheless, such was his respect for the priest, such his gratitude,his devotion, his love for this man had taken such deep root in hisheart, that they resisted, even at this moment, the talons of jealousyand despair.He reflected that the archdeacon had done this thing, and the wrathof blood and death which it would have evoked in him against any otherperson, turned in the poor deaf man, from the moment when Claude Frollowas in question, into an increase of grief and sorrow.At the moment when his thought was thus fixed upon the priest, whilethe daybreak was whitening the flying buttresses, he perceived onthe highest story of NotreDame, at the angle formed by the externalbalustrade as it makes the turn of the chancel, a figure walking. Thisfigure was coming towards him. He recognized it. It was the archdeacon.Claude was walking with a slow, grave step. He did not look before himas he walked, he was directing his course towards the northern tower,but his face was turned aside towards the right bank of the Seine, andhe held his head high, as though trying to see something over the roofs.The owl often assumes this oblique attitude. It flies towards onepoint and looks towards another. In this manner the priest passed aboveQuasimodo without seeing him.The deaf man, who had been petrified by this sudden apparition, beheldhim disappear through the door of the staircase to the north tower. Thereader is aware that this is the tower from which the HôteldeVille isvisible. Quasimodo rose and followed the archdeacon.Quasimodo ascended the tower staircase for the sake of ascending it, forthe sake of seeing why the priest was ascending it. Moreover, the poorbellringer did not know what he (Quasimodo) should do, what heshould say, what he wished. He was full of fury and full of fear. Thearchdeacon and the gypsy had come into conflict in his heart.When he reached the summit of the tower, before emerging from the shadowof the staircase and stepping upon the platform, he cautiously examinedthe position of the priest. The priest back was turned to him. Thereis an openwork balustrade which surrounds the platform of the belltower. The priest, whose eyes looked down upon the town, was resting hisbreast on that one of the four sides of the balustrades which looks uponthe Pont NotreDame.Quasimodo, advancing with the tread of a wolf behind him, went to seewhat he was gazing at thus.The priest attention was so absorbed elsewhere that he did not hearthe deaf man walking behind him.Paris is a magnificent and charming spectacle, and especially at thatday, viewed from the top of the towers of NotreDame, in the fresh lightof a summer dawn. The day might have been in July. The sky was perfectlyserene. Some tardy stars were fading away at various points, and therewas a very brilliant one in the east, in the brightest part of theheavens. The sun was about to appear; Paris was beginning to move. Avery white and very pure light brought out vividly to the eye all theoutlines that its thousands of houses present to the east. The giantshadow of the towers leaped from roof to roof, from one end of the greatcity to the other. There were several quarters from which were alreadyheard voices and noisy sounds. Here the stroke of a bell, there thestroke of a hammer, beyond, the complicated clatter of a cart in motion.Already several columns of smoke were being belched forth from thechimneys scattered over the whole surface of roofs, as through thefissures of an immense sulphurous crater. The river, which ruffles itswaters against the arches of so many bridges, against the points of somany islands, was wavering with silvery folds. Around the city, outsidethe ramparts, sight was lost in a great circle of fleecy vapors throughwhich one confusedly distinguished the indefinite line of the plains,and the graceful swell of the heights. All sorts of floating sounds weredispersed over this halfawakened city. Towards the east, the morningbreeze chased a few soft white bits of wool torn from the misty fleeceof the hills.In the Parvis, some good women, who had their milk jugs in theirhands, were pointing out to each other, with astonishment, the singulardilapidation of the great door of NotreDame, and the two solidifiedstreams of lead in the crevices of the stone. This was all that remainedof the tempest of the night. The bonfire lighted between the towers byQuasimodo had died out. Tristan had already cleared up the Place, andhad the dead thrown into the Seine. Kings like Louis XI. are careful toclean the pavement quickly after a massacre.Outside the balustrade of the tower, directly under the point where thepriest had paused, there was one of those fantastically carved stonegutters with which Gothic edifices bristle, and, in a crevice of thatgutter, two pretty wallflowers in blossom, shaken out and vivified,as it were, by the breath of air, made frolicsome salutations to eachother. Above the towers, on high, far away in the depths of the sky, thecries of little birds were heard.But the priest was not listening to, was not looking at, anything of allthis. He was one of the men for whom there are no mornings, no birds,no flowers. In that immense horizon, which assumed so many aspects abouthim, his contemplation was concentrated on a single point.Quasimodo was burning to ask him what he had done with the gypsy; butthe archdeacon seemed to be out of the world at that moment. He wasevidently in one of those violent moments of life when one would notfeel the earth crumble. He remained motionless and silent, with his eyessteadily fixed on a certain point; and there was something so terribleabout this silence and immobility that the savage bellringer shudderedbefore it and dared not come in contact with it. Only, and this was alsoone way of interrogating the archdeacon, he followed the direction ofhis vision, and in this way the glance of the unhappy deaf man fell uponthe Place de Grève.Thus he saw what the priest was looking at. The ladder was erected nearthe permanent gallows. There were some people and many soldiers inthe Place. A man was dragging a white thing, from which hung somethingblack, along the pavement. This man halted at the foot of the gallows.Here something took place which Quasimodo could not see very clearly. Itwas not because his only eye had not preserved its long range, but therewas a group of soldiers which prevented his seeing everything. Moreover,at that moment the sun appeared, and such a flood of light overflowedthe horizon that one would have said that all the points in Paris,spires, chimneys, gables, had simultaneously taken fire.Meanwhile, the man began to mount the ladder. Then Quasimodo saw himagain distinctly. He was carrying a woman on his shoulder, a young girldressed in white; that young girl had a noose about her neck. Quasimodorecognized her.It was she.The man reached the top of the ladder. There he arranged the noose. Herethe priest, in order to see the better, knelt upon the balustrade.All at once the man kicked away the ladder abruptly, and Quasimodo, whohad not breathed for several moments, beheld the unhappy child danglingat the end of the rope two fathoms above the pavement, with the mansquatting on her shoulders. The rope made several gyrations on itself,and Quasimodo beheld horrible convulsions run along the gypsy body.The priest, on his side, with outstretched neck and eyes starting fromhis head, contemplated this horrible group of the man and the younggirl,the spider and the fly.At the moment when it was most horrible, the laugh of a demon, a laughwhich one can only give vent to when one is no longer human, burst forthon the priest livid face.Quasimodo did not hear that laugh, but he saw it.The bellringer retreated several paces behind the archdeacon, andsuddenly hurling himself upon him with fury, with his huge hands hepushed him by the back over into the abyss over which Dom Claude wasleaning.The priest shrieked: Damnation! and fell.The spout, above which he had stood, arrested him in his fall. He clungto it with desperate hands, and, at the moment when he opened his mouthto utter a second cry, he beheld the formidable and avenging face ofQuasimodo thrust over the edge of the balustrade above his head.Then he was silent.The abyss was there below him. A fall of more than two hundred feet andthe pavement.In this terrible situation, the archdeacon said not a word, uttered nota groan. He merely writhed upon the spout, with incredible efforts toclimb up again; but his hands had no hold on the granite, his feet slidalong the blackened wall without catching fast. People who have ascendedthe towers of NotreDame know that there is a swell of the stoneimmediately beneath the balustrade. It was on this retreating anglethat miserable archdeacon exhausted himself. He had not to deal with aperpendicular wall, but with one which sloped away beneath him.Quasimodo had but to stretch out his hand in order to draw him from thegulf; but he did not even look at him. He was looking at the Grève. Hewas looking at the gallows. He was looking at the gypsy.The deaf man was leaning, with his elbows on the balustrade, at thespot where the archdeacon had been a moment before, and there, neverdetaching his gaze from the only object which existed for him in theworld at that moment, he remained motionless and mute, like a man struckby lightning, and a long stream of tears flowed in silence from that eyewhich, up to that time, had never shed but one tear.Meanwhile, the archdeacon was panting. His bald brow was dripping withperspiration, his nails were bleeding against the stones, his knees wereflayed by the wall.He heard his cassock, which was caught on the spout, crack and rip atevery jerk that he gave it. To complete his misfortune, this spout endedin a leaden pipe which bent under the weight of his body. The archdeaconfelt this pipe slowly giving way. The miserable man said to himselfthat, when his hands should be worn out with fatigue, when his cassockshould tear asunder, when the lead should give way, he would be obligedto fall, and terror seized upon his very vitals. Now and then he glancedwildly at a sort of narrow shelf formed, ten feet lower down, byprojections of the sculpture, and he prayed heaven, from the depths ofhis distressed soul, that he might be allowed to finish his life, wereit to last two centuries, on that space two feet square. Once, heglanced below him into the Place, into the abyss; the head which heraised again had its eyes closed and its hair standing erect.There was something frightful in the silence of these two men. Whilethe archdeacon agonized in this terrible fashion a few feet below him,Quasimodo wept and gazed at the Grève.The archdeacon, seeing that all his exertions served only to weaken thefragile support which remained to him, decided to remain quiet. There hehung, embracing the gutter, hardly breathing, no longer stirring, makingno longer any other movements than that mechanical convulsion of thestomach, which one experiences in dreams when one fancies himselffalling. His fixed eyes were wide open with a stare. He lost groundlittle by little, nevertheless, his fingers slipped along the spout;he became more and more conscious of the feebleness of his arms and theweight of his body. The curve of the lead which sustained him inclinedmore and more each instant towards the abyss.He beheld below him, a frightful thing, the roof of SaintJean le Rond,as small as a card folded in two. He gazed at the impressive carvings,one by one, of the tower, suspended like himself over the precipice, butwithout terror for themselves or pity for him. All was stone around him;before his eyes, gaping monsters; below, quite at the bottom, in thePlace, the pavement; above his head, Quasimodo weeping.In the Parvis there were several groups of curious good people, who weretranquilly seeking to divine who the madman could be who was amusinghimself in so strange a manner. The priest heard them saying, for theirvoices reached him, clear and shrill: Why, he will break his neck!Quasimodo wept.At last the archdeacon, foaming with rage and despair, understood thatall was in vain. Nevertheless, he collected all the strength whichremained to him for a final effort. He stiffened himself upon the spout,pushed against the wall with both his knees, clung to a crevice in thestones with his hands, and succeeded in climbing back with one foot,perhaps; but this effort made the leaden beak on which he restedbend abruptly. His cassock burst open at the same time. Then, feelingeverything give way beneath him, with nothing but his stiffened andfailing hands to support him, the unfortunate man closed his eyes andlet go of the spout. He fell.Quasimodo watched him fall.A fall from such a height is seldom perpendicular. The archdeacon,launched into space, fell at first head foremost, with outspread hands;then he whirled over and over many times; the wind blew him uponthe roof of a house, where the unfortunate man began to break up.Nevertheless, he was not dead when he reached there. The bellringer sawhim still endeavor to cling to a gable with his nails; but the surfacesloped too much, and he had no more strength. He slid rapidly along theroof like a loosened tile, and dashed upon the pavement. There he nolonger moved.Then Quasimodo raised his eyes to the gypsy, whose body he beheldhanging from the gibbet, quivering far away beneath her white robe withthe last shudderings of anguish, then he dropped them on the archdeacon,stretched out at the base of the tower, and no longer retaining thehuman form, and he said, with a sob which heaved his deep chest,Oh!all that I have ever loved!CHAPTER III. THE MARRIAGE OF PHOEBUS.Towards evening on that day, when the judiciary officers of the bishopcame to pick up from the pavement of the Parvis the dislocated corpse ofthe archdeacon, Quasimodo had disappeared.A great many rumors were in circulation with regard to this adventure.No one doubted but that the day had come when, in accordance with theircompact, Quasimodo, that is to say, the devil, was to carry off ClaudeFrollo, that is to say, the sorcerer. It was presumed that he had brokenthe body when taking the soul, like monkeys who break the shell to getat the nut.This is why the archdeacon was not interred in consecrated earth.Louis XI. died a year later, in the month of August, 1483.As for Pierre Gringoire, he succeeded in saving the goat, and he wonsuccess in tragedy. It appears that, after having tasted astrology,philosophy, architecture, hermetics,all vanities, he returned totragedy, vainest pursuit of all. This is what he called coming to atragic end. This is what is to be read, on the subject of his dramatictriumphs, in 1483, in the accounts of the Ordinary: To Jehan Marchandand Pierre Gringoire, carpenter and composer, who have made and composedthe mystery made at the Chãtelet of Paris, at the entry of Monsieur theLegate, and have ordered the personages, clothed and dressed the same,as in the said mystery was required; and likewise, for having made thescaffoldings thereto necessary; and for this deed,one hundred livres.Phoebus de Châteaupers also came to a tragic end. He married.CHAPTER IV. THE MARRIAGE OF QUASIMODO.We have just said that Quasimodo disappeared from NotreDame on the dayof the gypsy and of the archdeacon death. He was not seen again, infact; no one knew what had become of him.During the night which followed the execution of la Esmeralda, the nightmen had detached her body from the gibbet, and had carried it, accordingto custom, to the cellar of Montfauçon.Montfauçon was, as Sauval says, the most ancient and the most superbgibbet in the kingdom. Between the faubourgs of the Temple and SaintMartin, about a hundred and sixty toises from the walls of Paris, afew bow shots from La Courtille, there was to be seen on the crest of agentle, almost imperceptible eminence, but sufficiently elevated tobe seen for several leagues round about, an edifice of strange form,bearing considerable resemblance to a Celtic cromlech, and where alsohuman sacrifices were offered.Let the reader picture to himself, crowning a limestone hillock, anoblong mass of masonry fifteen feet in height, thirty wide, fortylong, with a gate, an external railing and a platform; on this platformsixteen enormous pillars of rough hewn stone, thirty feet in height,arranged in a colonnade round three of the four sides of the mass whichsupport them, bound together at their summits by heavy beams, whencehung chains at intervals; on all these chains, skeletons; in thevicinity, on the plain, a stone cross and two gibbets of secondaryimportance, which seemed to have sprung up as shoots around the centralgallows; above all this, in the sky, a perpetual flock of crows; thatwas Montfauçon.At the end of the fifteenth century, the formidable gibbet which datedfrom 1328, was already very much dilapidated; the beams were wormeaten,the chains rusted, the pillars green with mould; the layers of hewnstone were all cracked at their joints, and grass was growing on thatplatform which no feet touched. The monument made a horrible profileagainst the sky; especially at night when there was a little moonlighton those white skulls, or when the breeze of evening brushed the chainsand the skeletons, and swayed all these in the darkness. The presence ofthis gibbet sufficed to render gloomy all the surrounding places.The mass of masonry which served as foundation to the odious edifice washollow. A huge cellar had been constructed there, closed by an old irongrating, which was out of order, into which were cast not only the humanremains, which were taken from the chains of Montfauçon, but also thebodies of all the unfortunates executed on the other permanent gibbetsof Paris. To that deep charnelhouse, where so many human remains and somany crimes have rotted in company, many great ones of this world,many innocent people, have contributed their bones, from Enguerrand deMarigni, the first victim, and a just man, to Admiral de Coligni, whowas its last, and who was also a just man.As for the mysterious disappearance of Quasimodo, this is all that wehave been able to discover.About eighteen months or two years after the events which terminate thisstory, when search was made in that cavern for the body of Olivier leDaim, who had been hanged two days previously, and to whom CharlesVIII. had granted the favor of being buried in Saint Laurent, in bettercompany, they found among all those hideous carcasses two skeletons, oneof which held the other in its embrace. One of these skeletons, whichwas that of a woman, still had a few strips of a garment which had oncebeen white, and around her neck was to be seen a string of adrézarachbeads with a little silk bag ornamented with green glass, which was openand empty. These objects were of so little value that the executionerhad probably not cared for them. The other, which held this one in aclose embrace, was the skeleton of a man. It was noticed that his spinalcolumn was crooked, his head seated on his shoulder blades, and that oneleg was shorter than the other. Moreover, there was no fracture of thevertebrae at the nape of the neck, and it was evident that he had notbeen hanged. Hence, the man to whom it had belonged had come thither andhad died there. When they tried to detach the skeleton which he held inhis embrace, he fell to dust.NOTEADDED TO THE DEFINITIVE EDITION.It is by mistake that this edition was announced as augmented by manynew chapters. The word should have been unpublished. In fact, if by new,newly made is to be understood, the chapters added to this edition arenot new. They were written at the same time as the rest of the work;they date from the same epoch, and sprang from the same thought, theyhave always formed a part of the manuscript of NotreDamedeParis. Moreover, the author cannot comprehend how fresh developments could beadded to a work of this character after its completion. This is not tobe done at will. According to his idea, a romance is born in a mannerthat is, in some sort, necessary, with all its chapters; a drama is bornwith all its scenes. Think not that there is anything arbitrary in thenumbers of parts of which that whole, that mysterious microcosm whichyou call a drama or a romance, is composed. Grafting and solderingtake badly on works of this nature, which should gush forth in a singlestream and so remain. The thing once done, do not change your mind, donot touch it up. The book once published, the sex of the work, whethervirile or not, has been recognized and proclaimed; when the child hasonce uttered his first cry he is born, there he is, he is made so,neither father nor mother can do anything, he belongs to the air andto the sun, let him live or die, such as he is. Has your book been afailure? So much the worse. Add no chapters to an unsuccessful book. Isit incomplete? You should have completed it when you conceived it.Is your tree crooked? You cannot straighten it up. Is your romanceconsumptive? Is your romance not capable of living? You cannot supply itwith the breath which it lacks. Has your drama been born lame? Take myadvice, and do not provide it with a wooden leg.Hence the author attaches particular importance to the public knowingfor a certainty that the chapters here added have not been madeexpressly for this reprint. They were not published in the precedingeditions of the book for a very simple reason. At the time whenNotreDamedeParis was printed the first time, the manuscript ofthese three chapters had been mislaid. It was necessary to rewrite themor to dispense with them. The author considered that the only two ofthese chapters which were in the least important, owing to their extent,were chapters on art and history which in no way interfered with thegroundwork of the drama and the romance, that the public would notnotice their loss, and that he, the author, would alone be in possessionof the secret. He decided to omit them, and then, if the whole truthmust be confessed, his indolence shrunk from the task of rewriting thethree lost chapters. He would have found it a shorter matter to make anew romance.Now the chapters have been found, and he avails himself of the firstopportunity to restore them to their place.This now, is his entire work, such as he dreamed it, such as he made it,good or bad, durable or fragile, but such as he wishes it.These recovered chapters will possess no doubt, but little value inthe eyes of persons, otherwise very judicious, who have sought inNotreDamedeParis only the drama, the romance. But there areperchance, other readers, who have not found it useless to study theaesthetic and philosophic thought concealed in this book, and who havetaken pleasure, while reading NotreDamedeParis, in unravellingbeneath the romance something else than the romance, and in following(may we be pardoned these rather ambitious expressions), the systemof the historian and the aim of the artist through the creation of thepoet.For such people especially, the chapters added to this edition willcomplete NotreDamedeParis, if we admit that NotreDamedeParis was worth the trouble of completing.In one of these chapters on the present decadence of architecture, andon the death (in his mind almost inevitable) of that king of arts, theauthor expresses and develops an opinion unfortunately well rooted inhim, and well thought out. But he feels it necessary to say here that heearnestly desires that the future may, some day, put him in the wrong.He knows that art in all its forms has everything to hope from the newgenerations whose genius, still in the germ, can be heard gushing forthin our studios. The grain is in the furrow, the harvest will certainlybe fine. He merely fears, and the reason may be seen in the secondvolume of this edition, that the sap may have been withdrawn from thatancient soil of architecture which has been for so many centuries thebest field for art.Nevertheless, there are today in the artistic youth so much life,power, and, so to speak, predestination, that in our schools ofarchitecture in particular, at the present time, the professors, whoare detestable, produce, not only unconsciously but even in spite ofthemselves, excellent pupils; quite the reverse of that potter mentionedby Horace, who dreamed amphorae and produced pots. _Currit rota, urcensexit_.But, in any case, whatever may be the future of architecture, inwhatever manner our young architects may one day solve the question oftheir art, let us, while waiting for new monument, preserve the ancientmonuments. Let us, if possible, inspire the nation with a love fornational architecture. That, the author declares, is one of theprincipal aims of this book; it is one of the principal aims of hislife.NotreDamedeParis has, perhaps opened some true perspectives on theart of the Middle Ages, on that marvellous art which up to the presenttime has been unknown to some, and, what is worse, misknown by others.But the author is far from regarding as accomplished, the task which hehas voluntarily imposed on himself. He has already pleaded on more thanone occasion, the cause of our ancient architecture, he has alreadyloudly denounced many profanations, many demolitions, many impieties. Hewill not grow weary. He has promised himself to recur frequently to thissubject. He will return to it. He will be as indefatigable in defendingour historical edifices as our iconoclasts of the schools and academiesare eager in attacking them; for it is a grievous thing to see intowhat hands the architecture of the Middle Ages has fallen, and in what amanner the botchers of plaster of the present day treat the ruin of thisgrand art, it is even a shame for us intelligent men who see them atwork and content ourselves with hooting them. And we are not speakinghere merely of what goes on in the provinces, but of what is done inParis at our very doors, beneath our windows, in the great city, in thelettered city, in the city of the press, of word, of thought. We cannotresist the impulse to point out, in concluding this note, some ofthe acts of vandalism which are every day planned, debated, begun,continued, and successfully completed under the eyes of the artisticpublic of Paris, face to face with criticism, which is disconcerted byso much audacity. An archbishop palace has just been demolished, anedifice in poor taste, no great harm is done; but in a block with thearchiepiscopal palace a bishop palace has been demolished, a rarefragment of the fourteenth century, which the demolishing architectcould not distinguish from the rest. He has torn up the wheat withthe tares; tis all the same. They are talking of razing theadmirable chapel of Vincennes, in order to make, with its stones, somefortification, which Daumesnil did not need, however. While the PalaisBourbon, that wretched edifice, is being repaired at great expense,gusts of wind and equinoctial storms are allowed to destroy themagnificent painted windows of the SainteChapelle. For the last fewdays there has been a scaffolding on the tower of Saint Jacques de laBoucherie; and one of these mornings the pick will be laid to it. Amason has been found to build a little white house between the venerabletowers of the Palais deJustice. Another has been found willing to pruneaway SaintGermaindesPres, the feudal abbey with three bell towers.Another will be found, no doubt, capable of pulling down SaintGermainl’Auxerrois. All these masons claim to be architects, are paid by theprefecture or from the petty budget, and wear green coats. All the harmwhich false taste can inflict on good taste, they accomplish. Whilewe write, deplorable spectacle! one of them holds possession of theTuileries, one of them is giving Philibert Delorme a scar across themiddle of his face; and it is not, assuredly, one of the least of thescandals of our time to see with what effrontery the heavy architectureof this gentleman is being flattened over one of the most delicatefaçades of the Renaissance!PARIS, October 20, 1832.End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of NotreDame de Paris, by Victor Hugo END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTREDAME DE PARIS This file should be named 26100.txt or 26100.zip This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:    http:www.gutenberg.org2612610Produced by Peter Snow CaoUpdated editions will replace the previous onethe old editionswill be renamed.Creating the works from public domain print editions means that noone owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States withoutpermission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules,set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply tocopying and distributing Project Gutenbergtm electronic works toprotect the PROJECT GUTENBERGtm concept and trademark. ProjectGutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if youcharge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission. If youdo not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with therules is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purposesuch as creation of derivative works, reports, performances andresearch. They may be modified and printed and given awayyou may dopractically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks. Redistribution issubject to the trademark license, especially commercialredistribution. START: FULL LICENSE THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenbergtm mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase ProjectGutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full ProjectGutenbergtm License (available with this file or online athttp:gutenberg.orglicense).Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenbergtmelectronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenbergtmelectronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademarkcopyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroyall copies of Project Gutenbergtm electronic works in your possession.If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a ProjectGutenbergtm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by theterms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person orentity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenbergtm electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenbergtm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreementand help preserve free future access to Project Gutenbergtm electronicworks. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of ProjectGutenbergtm electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in thecollection are in the public domain in the United States. If anindividual work is in the public domain in the United States and you arelocated in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you fromcopying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivativeworks based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenbergare removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the ProjectGutenbergtm mission of promoting free access to electronic works byfreely sharing Project Gutenbergtm works in compliance with the terms ofthis agreement for keeping the Project Gutenbergtm name associated withthe work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement bykeeping this work in the same format with its attached full ProjectGutenbergtm License when you share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are ina constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, checkthe laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreementbefore downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing orcreating derivative works based on this work or any other ProjectGutenbergtm work. The Foundation makes no representations concerningthe copyright status of any work in any country outside the UnitedStates.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediateaccess to, the full Project Gutenbergtm License must appear prominentlywhenever any copy of a Project Gutenbergtm work (any work on which thephrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the phrase ProjectGutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,copied or distributed:This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away orreuse it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenbergtm electronic work is derivedfrom the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it isposted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copiedand distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any feesor charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a workwith the phrase Project Gutenberg associated with or appearing on thework, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and theProject Gutenbergtm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenbergtm electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additionalterms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linkedto the Project Gutenbergtm License for all works posted with thepermission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project GutenbergtmLicense terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenbergtm.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenbergtm License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including anyword processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to ordistribute copies of a Project Gutenbergtm work in a format other thanPlain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official versionposted on the official Project Gutenbergtm web site (www.gutenberg.org),you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide acopy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy uponrequest, of the work in its original Plain Vanilla ASCII or otherform. Any alternate format must include the full Project GutenbergtmLicense as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenbergtm worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenbergtm electronic works providedthat You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from   the use of Project Gutenbergtm works calculated using the method   you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is   owed to the owner of the Project Gutenbergtm trademark, but he   has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the   Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments   must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you   prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax   returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and   sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the   address specified in Section 4, Information about donations to   the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies   you in writing (or by email) within 30 days of receipt that she   does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenbergtm   License. You must require such a user to return or   destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium   and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of   Project Gutenbergtm works. You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any   money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the   electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days   of receipt of the work. You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free   distribution of Project Gutenbergtm works.1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenbergtmelectronic work or group of works on different terms than are setforth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing fromboth the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and MichaelHart, the owner of the Project Gutenbergtm trademark. Contact theFoundation as set forth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadpublic domain works in creating the Project Gutenbergtmcollection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenbergtm electronicworks, and the medium on which they may be stored, may containDefects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate orcorrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectualproperty infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, acomputer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read byyour equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES Except for the Rightof Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenbergtm trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenbergtm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium withyour written explanation. The person or entity that provided you withthe defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of arefund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entityproviding it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity toreceive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copyis also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without furtheropportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ASIS’ WITH NO OTHERWARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TOWARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates thelaw of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall beinterpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted bythe applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of anyprovision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenbergtm electronic works in accordancewith this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,promotion and distribution of Project Gutenbergtm electronic works,harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you door cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenbergtmwork, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to anyProject Gutenbergtm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project GutenbergtmProject Gutenbergtm is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computersincluding obsolete, old, middleaged and new computers. It existsbecause of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations frompeople in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergtmgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenbergtm collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenbergtm and future generations.To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundationand how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4and the Foundation web page at http:www.pglaf.org.Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary ArchiveFoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 646221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted athttp:pglaf.orgfundraising. Contributions to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extentpermitted by U.S. federal laws and your state laws.The Foundation principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scatteredthroughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 5961887, emailbusiness@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contactinformation can be found at the Foundation web site and officialpage at http:pglaf.orgFor additional contact information:   Dr. Gregory B. Newby   Chief Executive and Director   gbnewby@pglaf.orgSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive FoundationProject Gutenbergtm depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. ToSEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for anyparticular state visit http:pglaf.orgWhile we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.To donate, please visit: http:pglaf.orgdonateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenbergtm electronicworks.Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenbergtmconcept of a library of electronic works that could be freely sharedwith anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed ProjectGutenbergtm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.Project Gutenbergtm eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarilykeep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:   http:www.gutenberg.orgThis Web site includes information about Project Gutenbergtm,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.